                                                                     11646
                                                                      2025
                                                                         January 2025




Climate Transition Risks and
the Energy Sector
Viral V. Acharya, Stefano Giglio, Stefano Pastore, Johannes Stroebel, Zhenhao
Tan, Tiffany Yong
Impressum:

CESifo Working Papers
ISSN 2364-1428 (electronic version)
Publisher and distributor: Munich Society for the Promotion of Economic Research - CESifo
GmbH
The international platform of Ludwigs-Maximilians University’s Center for Economic Studies
and the ifo Institute
Poschingerstr. 5, 81679 Munich, Germany
Telephone +49 (0)89 2180-2740, Telefax +49 (0)89 2180-17845, email office@cesifo.de
Editor: Clemens Fuest
https://www.cesifo.org/en/wp
An electronic version of the paper may be downloaded
· from the SSRN website:       www.SSRN.com
· from the RePEc website:      www.RePEc.org
· from the CESifo website:     https://www.cesifo.org/en/wp
                                                                CESifo Working Paper No. 11646




    Climate Transition Risks and the Energy Sector

                                           Abstract

We build a general equilibrium model to study how climate transition risks affect energy prices
and the valuations of different firms in the energy sector. We consider two types of fossil fuel
firms: incumbents that have developed oil reserves they can extract today or tomorrow, and new
entrants that must invest in exploration and drilling today to have reserves to potentially extract
tomorrow. There are also renewable energy firms that produce emission-free energy but cannot
currently serve non-electrifiable sectors of the economy. We analyze three sources of climate
transition risk: (i) changes in the probability of a technological breakthrough that allows
renewable energy firms to serve all economic sectors; (ii) changes in expected future taxes on
carbon emissions; and (iii) restrictions on today’s development of additional fossil fuel production
capacity. We show that the different transition risk—and, importantly, uncertainty about their
realizations—have distinct effects on firms’ decisions, on their valuations, and on equilibrium
energy prices. We provide empirical support for the heterogeneous effects of different transition
risks on energy prices and stock returns of firms in different energy sub-sectors.
JEL-Codes: E310, Q350, Q380, Q430, Q540, Q580.
Keywords: climate change, renewable energy, green transition, policy uncertainty, fossil fuel
firms, brown firms, carbon tax, drilling restrictions, oil prices.


               Viral V. Acharya                                    Stefano Giglio
               NYU Stern / USA                           Yale SOM, New Haven / CT / USA
              vval@stern.nyu.edu                              stefano.giglio@yale.edu

                Stefano Pastore                                  Johannes Stroebel
               NYU Stern / USA                                    NYU Stern / USA
            spastore@stern.nyu.edu                           johannes.stroebel@nyu.edu

                Zhenhao Tan                                          Tiffany Yong
      Yale SOM, New Haven / CT / USA                               NYU Stern / USA
            zhenhao.tan@yale.edu                             tiffany.yong@stern.nyu.edu


This version: January 20, 2025
We thank Richard Berner, Robert Engle, Chitru Fernando (discussant), Chester Spatt (discussant),
and seminar participants at various seminars and conferences for helpful suggestions. We are
grateful for financial support from the Tobin Center for Economic Policy at Yale University and
the Volatility and Risk Institute at NYU Stern.
Through the burning of fossil fuels, energy production accounts for about three-quarters of
global greenhouse gas emissions (Ritchie and Roser, 2020), making the energy sector a key
policy focus in the fight against climate change. To encourage a transition from fossil fuels
towards alternative energy sources, policy makers have considered and sometimes employed a
range of tools, including carbon prices, R&D subsidies for renewable energy, and restrictions
on the development of new fossil fuel capacity. This paper explores the effects of these policies,
including the effects of uncertainty about their future implementation, on the dynamics of
prices, inventories, investment, production, and valuations in the energy sector. We find that
the different policies—while often jointly referred to as “climate transition risks”—can have
meaningfully different implications for these equilibrium outcomes.
     We build a two-period general equilibrium model to understand the effects of different cli-
mate transition risks on the energy sector (our model periods can be thought of as about a
decade apart). We model two types of fossil fuel firms: (i) incumbents with developed reserves
that can be extracted at low cost either today or tomorrow, and (ii) new entrants that need
to invest today to develop reserves for possible extraction tomorrow.1 In addition, there are
renewable energy firms that invest in capacity today—say by building a wind farm or a solar
park—to produce emissions-free energy at zero marginal cost tomorrow. With current tech-
nologies, the ability of renewable energy firms to power the economy is limited both by the
intermittency of renewable supply—the sun doesn’t always shine, and the wind doesn’t always
blow—and by the fact that many sectors of the economy are hard to electrify. This means that
with current technologies, some share of future economy-wide energy demand will need to be
supplied by fossil fuel firms, irrespective of the total capacity of renewable firms.
     We consider three sources of climate transition risk: (i) restrictions on developing new fossil
fuel production capacity; (ii) the possible introduction of future taxes on carbon emissions; and
(iii) the possibility of technological breakthroughs in storage and electrification that improve
renewable energy firms’ ability to meet a larger share of future economy-wide energy demand.
Each transition risk has a different effect on energy prices and valuations across the various parts
of the energy sector. We first study the various transition risks separately before developing a
rich model to consider them jointly.
Key Mechanisms. First, consider the effects of a (time-0) restriction on new fossil fuel capac-
ity, which can be analyzed largely by considering only the interaction between incumbent and
newly entering fossil fuel firms. Reduced investment in additional fossil fuel capacity today—for
example, due to restrictions on the availability of new oil leases—limits the supply of fossil fuels
tomorrow and thus puts upward pressure on future (time-1) energy prices. The anticipation of
these higher future energy prices leads incumbent fossil fuel producers to delay exploiting some
of their existing developed reserves, reducing extraction today and increasing it tomorrow. This
inter-temporal inventory management raises today’s equilibrium energy prices, leading to what
the European Central Bank’s Isabel Schnabel (2022) called “fossilflation.” This mechanism gen-
erates heterogeneous predictions for firm values across the energy sector. Higher energy prices
today and tomorrow raise the value of the existing production capacity of incumbent fossil
   1
     In practice, new exploration is often also done by incumbents. Separating the problem of when to extract
already developed reserves from the problem of how many new reserves to add allows us to build insights into
how various transition risks might differentially influence firms with more developed vs. undeveloped reserves,
a distinction that allows us to tie our theory to the data. In particular, in our empirical tests we place energy
firms on a continuum between pure entrants and pure incumbents based on the structure of their reserves.



                                                       1
fuel firms, thus raising their valuations. Renewable energy firms also have higher valuations,
since they now face less competition from fossil fuel producers tomorrow. At the same time,
restrictions on new capacity development reduce valuations of fossil fuel entrants.2
     The second policy we analyze is the possible introduction of a carbon tax, which we model
as a tax on the sale of fossil fuel-based energy. Whereas the drilling restrictions described above
take place at time 0 (so there is no uncertainty about them), the possible introduction of a
future carbon tax can be uncertain: in our model, we assume that the carbon tax is introduced
in period 1 with probability pT . We call T the state of the world where the carbon tax is
introduced, and NT the state of the world with no carbon tax. The effect of changes in the
carbon tax rate on energy prices is nonmonotonic, and depends on the initial level of the tax.
     Suppose first that the initial expected state-T tax is zero. This, of course, is the same as
the baseline case with no carbon tax. Just as in the baseline, it is optimal for the incumbent
to always exhaust its full remaining reserves in period 1: if any inventory ended up being
“stranded” in period 1—which would happen in both states of the world, since they are identical
at zero taxes—the incumbent would prefer extracting and selling it today.
     Now consider an increase in the T-state tax from zero to a (small) positive number. This
tax results in a decline in expected post-tax state-T energy prices, and the associated reduction
in expected profits leads fossil fuel entrants to install less new capacity. This decline in capacity
investment actually causes expected prices in the NT state to increase, since there is now less
supply but, by definition of the NT state, no taxes. Overall, expected post-tax prices in period
1—given by a probability-weighted combination of post-tax prices in the T and NT states—
fall after an increase in state-T carbon taxes. Incumbents respond to this decline in expected
period-1 post-tax prices by extracting more oil in period 0, so that oil prices today also fall.
This is a version of the classic “green paradox”, whereby expectations of higher future carbon
taxes actually lead to more emissions today (Sinn, 2008). The valuations of both incumbents
and new entrants fall as the expected tax increases, while those of renewable firms increase.
     But now consider further increases in the expected state-T carbon tax rate, which would
lead to further declines in the expected post-tax state-T price. At some point, the tax rate
will reach a level τstrand such that the resulting post-tax price is below the marginal cost of
extracting the incumbent’s full reserves in the T-state (at τstrand it remains profitable for the
entrant to extract all reserves, since its marginal cost of extracting the last unit of reserves is
lower). What will the incumbent do at this point? It could leave the marginally unprofitable
oil “stranded” in state T—simply never extracting that oil—or it could decide to extract more
oil at time 0 and thus arrive in period 1 with fewer reserves.
     As discussed above, if there was no uncertainty about the implementation of period-1 carbon
taxes, it would never be optimal to leave some oil stranded in that period with certainty as long
as it could be profitably extracted and sold today. But when carbon tax policy is uncertain,
there is also a no-tax state NT in which an incumbent can continue to extract its full inventory.
If expected prices in that state are high enough and the state is sufficiently likely, incumbents
might be willing to carry more inventory into period 1 than what they might be able to profitably
   2
    Incidentally, our model highlights how policies aimed at reducing restrictions on new oil supply—including
policies proposed by the new Trump administration—are not necessarily positive for incumbent producers, as
they can put downward pressure on oil prices. Consistent with this conclusion, the Wall Street Journal quotes
an investor in the oil and gas industry after the 2024 U.S. presidential election stating that “Our stocks will be
absolutely crushed if we start growing our production the way Trump is talking about it”. (from Morenne and
Eaton (2024), “Trump’s Oil and Gas Donors Don’t Really Want to ‘Drill, Baby, Drill’ ”, November 22nd, 2024).


                                                        2
extract in state T. In other words, even if the marginal unit carried into period 1 is stranded
in state T, it can still be sold in state NT, giving an expected period-1 revenue of (1 − pT )PN T
for a marginal unit of inventory, which may be more attractive than extracting the unit today.
    A key insight from our model is that after the state-T tax reaches τstrand , further increases in
the tax rate actually make it desirable for the incumbent to carry more inventory into period 1,
even if those additional reserves will also be stranded if state T materializes. This is because of
the interaction of two forces. First, since for τ > τstrand the incumbent’s marginal inventory is
always stranded in state T, further increases in the tax have no direct effects for the incumbent’s
decision: on the margin, the incumbent only responds to changes in expected prices in state NT.
Second, as described above, higher taxes continue to reduce new entrants’ incentive to build
capacity, and therefore lead to a higher price in the NT state, thus raising the incentives for
the incumbent to carry reserves into period 1. As a result, for τ > τstrand , equilibrium energy
prices today actually increase in τ . Higher taxes continue to reduce the valuations of all fossil
fuel firms, though this drop in valuations is attenuated for incumbents relative to new entrants.
    Another way to think about this mechanism is through the lens of real options. The in-
cumbents’ inventory has a real option component in that, if state-T taxes are too high, the
incumbent can decide not to extract the oil and let it be stranded; but if state NT occurs, it can
make large profits from extracting and selling oil due to less competition from new entrants. For
this effect to operate, uncertainty in the carbon tax is crucial, since it is that uncertainty that
gives value to the optionality. Uncertainty thus affects the “green paradox”: whereas higher
certain carbon taxes always induce more extraction and lower prices today, higher carbon taxes
that will be implemented only with some probability can have the opposite effect.
    Finally, consider the effects of the third type of transition risk, the possibility of a technolog-
ical breakthrough in renewable energy (assume for simplicity that there are no carbon taxes or
restrictions on drilling). To model this transition risk, we introduce renewable energy firms that
need to invest in capacity today to provide clean energy in the future. With some probability
pBT , a technological breakthrough occurs that allows renewable firms to provide energy to all
sectors of the economy at time 1; we denote this scenario as Breakthrough Technology (BT)
state. With probability 1 − pBT no such breakthrough occurs, and renewable firms can provide
energy (together with fossil-fuel firms) to only a share q of total time-1 energy demand, perhaps
because renewable supply is intermittent or because many economic sectors are not electrifiable.
In this Current Technology (CT) scenario, these non-electrifiable sectors will be entirely served
by fossil fuel companies. Without loss of generality, consider the case q = 0, such that absent a
technological breakthrough, renewable firms cannot supply any energy.
    Changes in the possibility of a technological breakthrough pBT are a key source of transition
risk. As pBT increases, renewable companies expand their capacity at time 0 to increase their
supply in the BT state; this reduces equilibrium BT-state prices. As a result, fossil fuel entrants
reduce their own capacity investments, and incumbents extract more of their reserves today,
leading to a fall in energy prices today. Valuations of renewable firms increase, while valuations
of fossil fuel firms fall, though with smaller declines for incumbents than for new entrants.
    Similar to the case of the carbon tax, uncertainty about the technological breakthrough can
also induce additional effects through a real options channel. Specifically, if the cost of installing
renewable capacity is sufficiently low, there is so much investment from renewable firms that it
becomes unprofitable for the fossil fuel incumbent to extract the full inventory in the BT state.
Therefore, once again, some of the incumbent’s oil reserves can become stranded. At that point,

                                                  3
further price changes in the BT state do not influence the marginal inventory decision by the
incumbent, which are entirely determined by the price of energy in the CT state. Therefore, for
some regions of the parameter space, increases in pBT can lead to higher prices at time 0 (and
an increase in time-1 inventories) in anticipation of high profits in the CT state, paralleling our
results for the carbon tax.
    At a general level, our model therefore highlights that many of standard intuitions about the
effects of transition risk (like the “green paradox”) become substantially more nuanced when
considering the effects of uncertainty about risk realizations on the decisions of firms that have
the real option to leave some oil capacity stranded in states with negative risk realizations.
Full Model. After exploring the effects of each type of transition risk separately, we develop a
model that jointly includes all three sources of transition risk and allows renewable firms to pro-
vide energy to parts of the economy in the Current Technology scenario (i.e., we generalize our
model to q > 0). To reduce the dimensionality of the state space, we show that if policymakers
are setting an optimal carbon policy, the states of the world with high carbon taxes are likely
to coincide with “technological breakthrough” states of the world in which renewable firms can
supply substantial amounts of energy. This is the case since carbon taxes in those states can
reduce emissions without substantial negative effects on energy prices and economic activity.
    We therefore simplify the full model by considering two states of the world: one in which the
technological breakthrough occurs and carbon taxes are high, and one in which the technological
breakthrough does not occur and carbon taxes are low. The full model confirms the insights
from considering the different climate transition risks individually; it also allows us to analyze
how the various transition risks affect the difference between energy prices for firms who can use
renewable energy in the Current Technology scenario, and those that have to rely on fossil fuels
for their energy demand. We find that all types of transition risk amplify the difference between
prices across the two markets, by encouraging investments in renewable energy production
capacity and reducing fossil fuel supply.
    Our model provides several testable implications for how oil prices and the stock prices of
different energy-sector firms should move in response to news about different climate transition
risks, as summarized in Table 1. Specifically, news that reveals an increase in the probability
of a technological breakthrough in renewable technologies or carbon taxes should have a nega-
tive effect on the stock price of fossil fuel companies, with particularly negative effects for new
entrants. The valuations of renewable energy firms should increase. Announcements on restric-
tions to develop new fossil fuel capacity, such as taxes on new oil drilling, will have a negative
effect on the stock price of fossil fuel companies with little capacity already in place (‘entrants’)
but may even raise the valuation of companies with large existing reserves (‘incumbents’).
    Finally, our model highlights uncertain and complex effects of news about carbon prices
and breakthrough probabilities on energy prices, while suggesting that energy prices would rise
upon the imposition of restrictions on new capacity development.
Empirical Results. We empirically test these implications by studying the reactions of oil
futures prices and of equity valuations in different energy sub-sectors to news about different
climate transition risks. To achieve this, we construct high-frequency transition news indices by
analyzing news reported in the New York Times (NYT) using GPT-4o Mini, an advanced large
language model (LLM) developed by OpenAI. Our analysis covers articles published over a 12-
year period from 2012 to 2023. We create three weekly indices: (1) the NYT-Emission Cost News


                                                 4
                                    Table 1: Summary of model predictions.


                         Increase in:   P(Tech Breakthrough)     Carbon tax in BT state    Drilling restrictions
 Current energy price (P0 )                   Uncertain                 Uncertain                Increases
 Future energy price (E[P1 ])                 Decreases                 Increases                Increases
 Incumbent fossil fuel producer
   Inventory                                 Uncertain                 Uncertain                 Increases
   Stock price                             Decreases (less)          Decreases (less)            Increases
 Entrant fossil fuel producer
   Production capacity                       Decreases                 Decreases                Decreases
   Stock price                            Decreases (more)          Decreases (more)            Decreases
 Renewable energy producer
  Production capacity                         Increases                 Increases                Increases
  Stock price                                 Increases                 Increases                Increases



Index, which captures news about carbon pricing policies and the regulatory or financial costs of
carbon emissions, including the introduction of taxes or other policies on carbon emissions; (2)
the NYT-Renewable Breakthrough News Index, which covers news related to the probability
of breakthroughs in renewable energy or battery storage technology, and actual technological
advancements in these fields; and (3) the NYT-Oil Capacity News Index, which captures news
regarding policies affecting the expansion of fossil fuel capacity, such as changing infrastructure
permit availability, financing availability, and compliance requirements.
    Figure 1 plots the time series of the three news indices. In Panel A, the NYT-Emission Cost
News Index shows spikes around significant climate-related events, such as the first proposal of
the Clean Power Plan in 2014, its repeal proposal in 2017, and Biden rejoining the Paris Agree-
ment in 2021. In Panel B, the NYT-Renewable Breakthrough News Index spikes around events
favoring renewable energy or announcing technological breakthroughs, such as advancements
in industrial-scale biofuel production in the U.S. in 2014, the unveiling of affordable zinc air
batteries in 2018, and China scaling up production of sodium batteries in 2023. In Panel C, the
NYT-Oil Capacity News Index spikes around regulations related to fossil fuel production, like
the review of the Keystone XL oil pipeline in 2017 (negative spike indicating fewer restrictions)
and its permit revocation in 2021 (positive spike indicating more restrictions).
    We then study the response of energy prices and stock returns of energy firms to innovations
in these news indices. For our stock-price analysis, we identify two groups of firms: fossil fuel
firms and renewable energy firms. For each fossil fuel firm, we measure its “developed ratio”,
the share of its oil reserves that are already developed.3 Firms with higher developed ratios—
such as Exxon, Chevron, Conoco Phillips, Occidental Petroleum, and Devon Energy—should
behave more like the incumbents in our model, and firms with lower developed ratios—such
as BPZ Energy, ZaZa Energy, and Lonestar Resources—should behave more like new entrants
who will have to decide whether to invest to have oil capacity tomorrow. We identify renewable
firms using the holding firms of the Invesco Solar ETF and the First Trust Global Wind Energy
ETF, which includes companies in the solar and wind energy industry respectively. Examples
of these firms include First Solar, Altus Power, and Arcosa Towers.
   3
    Chevron’s 10-K statement provides the following definitions: “Proved developed reserves represent volumes
expected to be recovered through existing wells with existing equipment and operating methods. Proved undeveloped
reserves are volumes expected to be recovered from new wells on undrilled proved acreage, or from existing wells
where a relatively major expenditure is required for recompletion.”


                                                          5
                                                                                          Figure 1: Time-Series of NYT News Index

                                                                                                    (a) NYT-Emission Cost News
                 10




                                                               EPA Proposes Clean Power Plan
                                                            Introducing First Ever Rules to Reduce
                                                         Carbon Emissions from Existing Power Plants                                                              Biden Proposes Spending Bill Focusing
                                                                                                                                                                           on Climate Change
                                                                                                                                                           Biden Rejoins
                                                                                                                                                          Paris Agreement
 NYT U.S. Cost of Emission Index


                                    Increase




                                                                                        Obama Announces                                                                                   Biden Passes
                                                                                         Final Version of                                                                               $369 billion Climate
                                                                                        Clean Power Plan               Democratic Candidates Promise                                     and Tax Package
                                                                                                                        Unprecedented New Action on
                        5




                                                                                                                                                                                               (IRA)
                                                         Obama Releases His                                                   Climate Change
                                                         Climate Action Plan
       0

                                    Decrease




                                                                                                                                                                                      Supreme Court Limits
                                                                                     Trump Signs Executive Order               EPA Announces Repeal                                       EPA's Ability
                                                                                     to Reverse Clean Power Plan                of Clean Power Plan                                  to Regulate Emissions
                                                                                                           Trump Officially Withdraws
                                                                                                             from Paris Agreement
                 -5




                        06 Jan 2012                              06 Nov 2013               07 Sep 2015             08 Jul 2017             09 May 2019                 09 Mar 2021                08 Jan 2023




                                                                                            (b) NYT-Renewable Breakthrough News
                 8




                                                                                                                                                                                    Biden Sets Aside $7.5 billion
                                                                                                                                                                                   to Build EV Charging Stations
                                                                                                                                                                                       on Federal Highways
                                                                                                            Britain Invests in
                                                                                 Hyundai Brings          Offshore Wind Projects
 NYT Renewable Breakthrough Index




                                                                                 Hydrogen Cars
                                                                                   to Market                                                                                                         China Produces
                                    More Likely




                                                                                                                                                                                                     Sodium Batteries
                            6




                                                                                                                                                               UN Report Finds Significant
                                                                                             Paris Agreement                  China Expands                    Drop in Price of Solar Panels             At Scale
                                                                                                                           Floating Solar Projects               and Lithium-Ion Batteries
                                                         France Plans to Develop                                                                                    in the Last Decade
                                                        13 km Geothermal Network
                                                                                                                            Affordable Zinc Air Batteries
                                                   First Large-Scale Biofuel                                                         Unveiled
                4




                                                  Production Plant in the U.S.
                                    Less Likely
     2           0




                        06 Jan 2012                              06 Nov 2013               07 Sep 2015             08 Jul 2017             09 May 2019                 09 Mar 2021                08 Jan 2023




                                                                                                     (c) NYT-Oil Capacity News
                 10




                                                               EPA Proposes Clean Power Plan
                                                            Introducing First Ever Rules to Reduce                                                   Biden Strengthens Methane Leak             U.S. Bans Imports of
                                                         Carbon Emissions from Existing Power Plants                                                 Regulations on Oil and Gas Wells          Russian Crude Oil and
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Biden Pauses New
                                                                                                                                     Biden Rejoins Paris Agreement                              Oil and Gas Leases
                                    Increase




                                                                                                                                  and Revokes Keystone Pipeline Permit
 NYT Oil Capacity Index




                                                                                                                                       Democratic Candidates Promise
                    5




                                                                                           Exxon-Mobil Shareholders                      Unprecedented New Action
                                                                                           Demand Climate Transition                        on Climate Change
                                                                                              Risk Assessments
  0

                                    Decrease




                                                                                                                                    Brazil Auctions Land
                                                                                                                                     for Offshore Drilling                                       Congress Debt Ceiling
                                                                                                                      Trump Rolls Back Ban                                                          Negotiation for
                                                                                                                     on Offshore Oil Drilling                                                       Relaxing Fossil
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Fuel Regulations
                                                                                                      Trump Revives Review of
                                                                                                  Keystone and Dakota Oil Pipelines
                 -5




                        06 Jan 2012                              06 Nov 2013               07 Sep 2015             08 Jul 2017             09 May 2019                 09 Mar 2021                08 Jan 2023


Note: Panel (a) shows the weekly NYT-Emission Cost News Index, panel (b) shows the weekly NYT-Renewable
Breakthrough News Index, and panel (c) shows the weekly NYT-Oil Capacity News Index from 2012 to 2023,
annotated with climate-relevant events that have potential effects on cost of emissions and renewable energy
supports. IRA: Inflation Reduction Act.



                                                                                                                           6
    We find that, consistent with the theory, renewable energy companies earn positive returns in
weeks with news about each of the three types of transition risks, whereas fossil fuel companies
generally have negative returns in those weeks. Consistent with the model predictions, we
also observe differential price movements for fossil fuel firms depending on their developed
ratios: news about all three types of transition risks leads to larger price declines for firms with
more undeveloped vs. developed reserves. Overall, these results highlight how transition risk
realizations have heterogeneous effects on different types of fossil fuel firms.
    Oil future prices are more noisy and driven by macroeconomic factors besides transition risk
news. Nevertheless, we find that, consistent with our model, oil futures prices decrease during
months with news about possible renewable energy breakthroughs. They increase in months
with news related to increasing cost of carbon emissions (consistent with an expectation that
some oil capacity will be stranded in the high-tax state of the world). Oil futures prices do not
generally move in a statistically significant manner with news about changes in oil capacity.
Related Literature. Our paper belongs to the growing literature on climate finance, recently
reviewed by Giglio et al. (2021), with a particular focus on the implication for energy firms (see
van Benthem et al., 2022). While we focus on studying the effects of climate transition risks
on the energy sector from a theoretical perspective, we are motivated by existing empirical
evidence. On the energy-price front, Känzig (2023) shows that a carbon policy tightening shock
in the Eurozone causes an increase in the price of energy. A similar conclusion is reached by
Konradt and Weder di Mauro (2022), who argue that carbon pricing increases the cost of energy.
In terms of the effects of transition risks on firm valuations, Alekseev et al. (2022) find that
energy firm stocks are not consistently negatively affected by generic climate transition news
(see also Hong et al., 2019; Bolton and Kacperczyk, 2021; Engle et al., 2020, for related work
studying the stock price effects of climate risks). Connecting these lines of research, our model
highlights how the fossil fuel sector might respond differentially to various types of transition
risk, and also offers predictions for the stock price of fossil fuel firms in response to climate
transition risk and as a function of their existing capacity. We also relate to empirical work by
Adolfsen et al. (2024), who show that fossil fuel firms with greater exposure to climate change
significantly increased their investment in response to the Paris Agreement, arguing that in
anticipation of future climate policy, fossil fuel firms might have a short-term incentive to raise
production. Our model features such a channel whereby incumbents adjust the timing of the
extraction of developed reserves based on expectations of future transition risk realizations.
    On the theoretical front, Pisani-Ferry (2021) highlight that policymakers should adopt a
macroeconomic perspective that takes general equilibrium effects into account when analyzing
the effects of climate policies. Along these lines, Engle (2023) develops a model of “termination
risk” which captures the idea that fossil fuel assets might become stranded at some point in
the future, which might have the effect of reducing energy supply today. Our model features
similar forces, but also shows that technological developments in the renewable energy sector
can instead push down the current price of energy. Barnett (2023) reaches the related conclusion
that expectations of future restrictions on fossil fuel use might induce oil producers to increase
current supply, thus increasing emissions and pushing down energy prices. This possibility has
been labeled as the “green paradox” (Sinn, 2008; Kellogg, 2024). Our model provides a nuanced
view on the possible relationship between changes in expected transition risk realizations and
energy prices, and highlights the importance of transition uncertainty in driving these effects.


                                                 7
    A growing theoretical literature also studies the effects of climate transition risks on the
aggregate inflation level, mostly relying on models based on the New Keynesian framework.
Ferrari and Nispi Landi (2024) argue that expectations of future carbon taxes can have defla-
tionary effects on the economy, while Del Negro et al. (2023) find that the price level response
to the green transition depends on the degree of price stickiness in the various sectors of the
economy, and in particular of green and non-green sectors.
    Finally, our paper is related to the large macroeconomic literature studying optimal carbon
tax and green subsidy policies in the presence of emissions externalities (Acemoglu et al., 2012;
Golosov et al., 2014; Lemoine and Traeger, 2014; Acemoglu et al., 2016; Aghion et al., 2016).
Another related paper is Acharya et al. (2023), which builds a model to study “Net Zero” carbon
commitments by corporations in a model with externalities in renewable sector innovations,
and investigates the role of large firms and common ownership in this context. We add to this
literature by studying how optimal carbon taxes should depend on the extent of a breakthrough
technological development in the renewable energy sector. Furthermore, we also analyze the
energy price implications of taxes on newly installed fossil fuel production capacity.


1     Two-Period Climate Transition Risk Model
We start by building and describing a simple two-period general-equilibrium model of the energy
sector. We gradually introduce each of the three transition risks that we study to clearly
isolate their implications on energy prices and firm valuations. In particular, we start by
studying drilling restrictions in a model with no renewable energy sector and no uncertainty
about the future. In the next step, we introduce the possibility of future carbon taxes. We
first study the effects of such taxes that will be implemented with certainty, before introducing
uncertainty about their future implementation. Then, we investigate the effects of a possible
technological breakthrough that allows green firms to supply energy to the entire economy.
We close this section by studying optimal carbon taxes in our framework. In the subsequent
section, we present a model that incorporates all three climate transition risks jointly while
fully endogenizing prices. We solve that model numerically to provide testable implications,
and highlight that all intuitions developed in the simpler model in this section carry through.

1.1   Baseline model Without Renewable Energy Firms
Time is discrete and there are two periods, denoted by t = 0, 1, with a gross discount rate
R = 1. We analyze a simple market for energy, where supply is provided by two types of fossil
fuel-based energy producers: an incumbent firm with developed reserves that can be extracted
today or tomorrow, and a new entrant that needs to invest today to build capacity to extract
tomorrow. We investigate the effects on energy prices of a time-0 tax on the creation of new
fossil fuel capacity by the entrant firm, τ̄0 . This tax could correspond to a range of actual
policies, including increasing the cost of new drilling or making fewer new oil leases available;
it can also capture an increase in the cost of capital for fossil fuel exploration.
    At time 0, the incumbent fossil fuel producer (superscript I) has an existing capacity f¯0I ,
which can be extracted immediately or saved for the next period as inventory. Extracting an
amount of energy ft has a cost of 2κ1 1 ft2 , with κ1 > 0. Taking as given the price of energy in
the two periods, (P0 , P1 ), the incumbent firm chooses production quantities (f0I , f1I ) that solve


                                                 8
                                                                    1
                                        max         f0I P0 −          (f I )2 + V1I ,                           (1)
                                      0≤f0I ≤f¯0I                  2κ1 0

where the period-1 continuation value V1I is equal to

                                                                            1
                                    V1I =           max        P1 f1I −       (f I )2 .                         (2)
                                            0≤f1I ≤f¯0I −f0I               2κ1 1

The other producer in the economy is a representative fossil-fuel entrant firm (superscript E)
that has no existing production capacity, and has to choose how much new capacity to install to
be used in period 1.4 Installing an amount of new capacity f¯1E has a cost 2(1−τ̄1 0 )κ2 (f¯1E )2 , with
κ2 > 0. The tax rate τ̄0 captures the extent of restrictions on capacity expansion. Production
costs in period 1 are the same as for the incumbent firm. The fossil fuel entrant therefore
chooses its capacity investment in period 0 and its production in period 1 (f¯1E , f1E ) by solving:

                                                         1
                                      max −                      (f¯E )2 + V1E ,                                (3)
                                      f¯1E ≥0       2(1 − τ̄0 )κ2 1

where the period-1 continuation value V1E is equal to

                                                                           1
                                     V1E =        max         P1 f1E −       (f E )2 .                          (4)
                                                0≤f1E ≤f¯1E               2κ1 1
We close the model by introducing a unit mass of consumers with strictly concave utility u from
energy consumption. In each period, consumers have exogenous wealth W that can be used
to purchase energy. We assume that wealth cannot be stored across periods, so that energy
demand in each period is equal to W
                                  Pt , giving us the following market clearing conditions:

                                                          W
                                                             = f0I                                              (5)
                                                          P0

                                                     W
                                                        = f1I + f1E .                                           (6)
                                                     P1
The definition of equilibrium in this model is standard. Throughout the paper, we make the
following assumption.

Assumption 1. The initial production capacity of the incumbent fossil fuel firm, f¯0I , is not so
large that the firm is unconstrained in both periods.

This assumption suggests that, absent any transition risk realizations, the incumbent firm ex-
pects to extract its full remaining reserves at the period-1 equilibrium price, setting up an
interesting trade-off between the choice of extracting today or tomorrow.

1.2    Effects of Drilling Restrictions
In this section, we are interested in studying the effect that drilling restrictions have on firm
valuations and energy prices. We derive the following result.
   4
     In practice, new oil exploration may also be done by incumbents. By separating the problem of how much to
extract from current reserves from the problem of how many new reserves to add, we are able to develop insights
into how various transition risks might differentially influence firms with more developed vs. undeveloped reserves.



                                                               9
Proposition 1. Increases in drilling restrictions (higher τ̄0 ) cause a reduction in the newly
installed production capacity by the entrant firm. In response, the incumbent firm reduces its
date-0 energy supply, which increases the date-0 price of energy. Increases in drilling restrictions
reduce profits for the entrant but increase them for the incumbent.

The intuition is the following. Restrictions on the development of new fossil fuel capacity only
affect the entrant firm directly: given higher costs of installing new capacity, it reduces its
investment in period 0. The incumbent firm anticipates that it will face less competition and
higher energy prices in period 1, and thus has the incentive to reduce current energy supply to
shift production capacity to period 1. This increases the period-0 energy price.
    Drilling restrictions reduce expected profits for the entrant who has to pay τ̄0 . The incumbent
instead benefits from the reduced future competition by the entrant in period 1, and its expected
profits thus increase. Therefore, Proposition 1 predicts that news about increased drilling
restrictions should have a negative effect on the stock prices of oil and gas firms with little
existing capacity—those firms who would still need to invest to develop their current reserves—
while firms with large developed reserves can even see their stock market valuations increase
due to reduced competition from entrants in the product market.
    While we will formally test these predictions in the second part of the paper, it is worth
highlighting that they are highly consistent with recent discussions around the possible effects of
expected reductions in constraints on the creation of future oil capacity by the incoming Trump
administration (which would correspond to a lower τ̄0 ). For instance, the Wall Street Journal
argues that “lowering the cost of doing business—say, through less stringent environmental
rules—could help smaller, wildcatter-type producers join the drilling party, potentially pinching
profitability for the industry overall” (Lee, 2024a). It also reports how some energy analysts
after the 2024 U.S. elections stated that “historically, though, traditional energy has performed
slightly better under Democrats [...]. That is because they tend to favor putting roadblocks on new
supply, which helps limit capital spending and boost oil prices [...]. And those roadblocks tend to
be more damaging to small producers rather than giants” (Lee, 2024b). These articles crucially
highlights how restrictions on new drilling can affect incumbents and new firms differentially in
ways that are highly consistent with our theoretical framework.

1.3   Model with certain carbon taxes
The second source of transition risk we consider is the possible introduction of a carbon tax. To
establish a benchmark, we first consider a tax that is implemented with certainty in the future,
and study its effects on the energy sector. In particular, we assume that a tax τ1 is implemented
in period 1, so that fossil fuel producers now only earn (1 − τ1 )P1 from selling an additional
unit of energy in period 1. We derive the following result.

Proposition 2. Increases in carbon taxes implemented with certainty in period 1 cause a reduc-
tion in the newly installed production capacity by fossil fuel entrants, as well as a reduction in
the fossil fuel capacity carried into the future as inventory by incumbents. As a consequence, the
incumbent increases its date-0 energy supply, which reduces the date-0 price of energy. Expected
profits of both incumbents and entrants decline.

This Proposition highlights that if fossil fuel firms expect the introduction of carbon taxes with
certainty in the future, then they will have the incentive to increase current energy supply, as

                                                10
the carbon tax will reduce future profits. As period-0 supply increases, current energy prices
decline. Our result is therefore a version of the “green paradox” that has been discussed in the
literature, in which expectations about future climate policies can induce the fossil fuel sector
to raise current production, and thus to increase present-day carbon emissions. In the next
section, we show how this result crucially relies on the expectation that the carbon tax will be
implemented with certainty. Introducing uncertainty can induce existing fossil fuel companies
to modify their production and inventory decisions in interesting ways.

1.4   Model with uncertain carbon tax
We now introduce a carbon tax that is implemented only with some probability in the future.
Specifically, we assume that there are two possible states in period 1, indexed by s ∈ {T, N T }.
We denote with pT the probability that state T realizes, in which case a carbon tax τ1 is
introduced on fossil fuel firms’ revenues. Demand for energy is the same across the two states,
and thus the only difference between the states is the carbon tax. The Appendix provides
more details about the updated problem of fossil fuel firms and the solution of this model.
Throughout the paper, we make the following realistic assumption.

Assumption 2. In period 1, the incumbent has a higher marginal cost of extracting its last
unit of reserves than the entrant has.

Since our model assumes that incumbents and entrants have the same convex marginal cost curve
of extracting developed reserves, Assumption 2 corresponds to the entrant arriving in period 1
with fewer developed reserves than the incumbent, a condition that will hold if f¯0 is sufficiently
large. Assumption 2 could also be microfounded from alternative realistic assumptions in a
richer model. For example, some of the incumbents’ capacity was installed at times in which oil
prices were expected to be higher for longer, and therefore includes fields such as the Canadian
tar sands with extraction technologies such that marginal oil extraction is only profitable at
relatively higher prices (Heyes et al., 2018). New entrants, aware of the possibility of carbon
taxes and the climate transition, tend to focus their investment in new capacity on fields with
lower marginal cost of extraction, often focusing on shale gas extraction that is profitable at
lower oil prices (Rystad Energy, 2024). An alternative setup that incorporates these forces
would also yield a lower marginal cost of extraction for new entrants. There is substantial
evidence that, indeed, newly added capacity focuses on cheaper-to-extract oil: for example,
consider the following quotes: “Oil majors are now hedging their bets by targeting new oilfields
that can be profitable even at $30 per barrel oil, reflecting executives’ belief that high prices are
anything but guaranteed” (Kimani, 2024), and “Rystad Energy’s annual cost of supply analysis
has revealed that costs within the upstream sector have come down considerably in 2021, making
new oil more competitive and significantly cheaper to produce. The average breakeven price for
new oil projects has dropped to around $47 per barrel—down around 8% over the past year and
40% since 2014” (Rystad Energy, 2021).
    We now show that carbon taxes implemented in the future with uncertainty can have non-
monotone effects on current energy prices, including a reversion of the “green paradox.”

Proposition 3. The effect on date-0 energy prices of expected increases in a future carbon taxes
τ1 implemented with some probability is ambiguous. In particular:



                                                 11
   • For low enough values of the tax rate, increases in the carbon tax cause a reduction in the
     date-0 energy price, that is dP
                                  dτ1 < 0 [“Green Paradox”].
                                     0



   • For high enough values of the expected tax rate, further increases in the expected carbon
     tax cause an increase in the date-0 energy price, that is dP
                                                               dτ1 ≥ 0.
                                                                  0



The intuition for this result is the following. Consider first the case where the tax is sufficiently
small that both incumbent and new entrant fully exhaust their capacity in period 1 in both the
T and NT states. In that case, the optimal period-0 fossil fuel supply by the incumbent is:

                            ¯
                            f0 κ1
                                                                             
                      f0I =   +        P0 − pT (1 − τ1 )P1,T − (1 − pT )P1,N T ,                 (7)
                            2     2

while optimal capacity installation by the entrant is:
                                                                             
                   ¯E      (1 − τ̄0 )κ1 κ2
                  f1 =                      pT (1 − τ1 )P1,T + (1 − pT )P1,N T .                 (8)
                         κ1 + (1 − τ̄0 )κ2

These optimality conditions highlight that the decisions of both incumbent and new entrant
depend on the probability-weighted average of the (post-tax) prices in state T, (1 − τ1 )P1,T , and
in state NT, P1,N T . As the carbon tax increases, profits in state T (and thus expected profits in
period 1) fall for both producers. As a result, the entrant’s incentive to invest in new capacity
and the incumbent’s incentive to carry inventory into period 1 are reduced, leading to lower
supply in period 1, similar to the case with the certain tax discussed in the previous section. The
incumbents’ decision to carry less inventory into period 1 corresponds to a decision to extract
more developed reserves in period 0, leading to a fall in period-0 equilibrium prices. As discussed
above, this behavior—having higher extraction and higher emissions today in anticipation of
possible higher taxes tomorrow—is sometimes referred to as the “green paradox.”
    Now, suppose that the expected state-T tax rate continues to increase. This makes it less
and less profitable for the incumbent to extract its full reserves in state T, up to the point where
it becomes economically preferable to leave some oil in the ground—sometimes called leaving
the marginal oil “stranded”—as opposed to extracting it (one can think about the decision to
leave oil stranded as similar to not exercising a real option to extract it). This will happen
when the post-tax price (1 − τ1 )P1,T is lower than the marginal cost of extracting the final unit
of reserves. Note that because of Assumption 2, it is the incumbent (whose marginal cost for
its last unit is higher) that will first choose to leave some inventory stranded. We refer to the
tax rate at which the incumbent’s last unit of period-1 reserves is stranded in state T as τstrand .
    When the tax rate reaches τstrand , the optimality condition for the new entrant stays the
same (equation 8), but the incumbent’s level of optimal marginal oil extraction in period 0—and
thus the decision of optimal inventory to carry into period 1—becomes:
                                                                         
                           I    1 − pT ¯       κ1
                          f0 =          f0 +          P0 − (1 − pT )P1,N T .                     (9)
                                2 − pT       2 − pT

A key insight is that the incumbent’s intertemporal inventory decision no longer directly depends
on the tax rate τ1 once τ1 > τstrand : since some reserves are already stranded in state T, further
increases in τ1 have no direct effect on the incumbents’ marginal decision of whether to extract
reserves today or carry them as inventory to tomorrow, though higher taxes will continue to
strand additional inframarginal units of oil, which reduces the incumbent’s total profits.

                                                  12
    Interestingly, tax increases beyond τstrand continue to have indirect general-equilibrium ef-
fects on the incumbents’ period-0 extraction decision. Specifically, since higher taxes continue
to induce the new entrant to reduce investment (see equation 8), they raise the equilibrium price
in the period-1 state where the tax is not imposed, the NT state. This, in turn, actually raises
the expected value of a marginal period-1 unit of reserves for the incumbent: its value in state
T continues to be zero—the unit is still stranded and will not be extracted—but it can now be
sold at higher expected prices in the NT state. This provides incentives for the incumbent to
increase the amount of reserves to carry into period 1.
    The net effect of these forces is that for sufficiently high levels of the carbon tax—those levels
where some of the incumbent inventory will already by stranded in the T state—the time-0
energy price can actually increase in response to further increases in the expected tax rate.
As this discussion highlights, the uncertainty about the implementation of the tax, combined
with the competitive interactions between entrants and incumbents and the incumbent’s real
option to leave some developed reserves stranded, plays a central role in determining this non-
monotonicity, which effectively reverses the “green paradox” effect at high levels of expected
carbon taxes τ in state T.
    Despite the nonmonotonic effects of taxes on period-0 energy prices, the model suggests
that both incumbent and newly entering fossil fuel firms will see declining valuations as ex-
pected taxes in the T-state increase—after all, higher taxes will strand more and more of the
incumbent’s inventory in state T, which reduces its value even if it does not directly affect
its marginal extraction decision—with smaller effects for firms with larger existing production
capacities. We will find support for this prediction in the data.
Generalization. The previous result assumes that the tax is exactly zero in the NT state.
But an analysis of the economic forces involved (and discussed intuitively above) suggests that
a carbon tax equal to zero in the NT state is not necessary in order to obtain our result. It is
sufficient that one of the future states of the world is expected to have a lower carbon tax than
the other, as long as it is still be profitable for the incumbent to fully exhaust its production
capacity in that lower-tax state (consistent with Assumption 1). We derive the following result.

Proposition 4. Consider a carbon tax rate equal to τ1 implemented in the NT state, and a tax
rate equal to τ1 + ∆, ∆ > 0, implemented in the T state. Suppose that τ1 and ∆ are such that
the incumbent firm fully exhausts its production capacity in the NT state only, while the entrant
firm has no stranded assets in either state. Then, we have the following result:

    • Increases in the carbon tax spread between the two states cause an increase in the date-0
      energy price, that is dP
                            d∆ > 0.
                               0



The intuition behind Proposition 3 also applies here: higher taxes in the T-state discourage
investment in production capacity by the entrant. The incumbent already expects its marginal
inventory to be stranded in the T state, therefore its inventory decisions at the margin only
depend on energy prices in the NT state. As the energy price in the NT state increases due to
lower supply by the entrant, the incumbent firm raises its fossil fuel inventory to be carried into
the future. This lowers current fossil fuel supply, and increases the period-0 energy price.5
   5
     The effect on the period-0 energy price of changes in the tax level τ1 in both states is, in general, uncertain.
On the one hand, energy price in the NT state is higher because of the lower supply from the entrant, which
induces the incumbent to increase its inventory. On the other, the higher tax reduces profits in the NT state,
and this force induces the incumbent to reduce its future inventory.


                                                         13
1.5    Model with a green energy transition
We now consider a different dimension of uncertainty, related to the possibility of transitioning
to an economy where clean producers can reliably satisfy the economy’s full energy demand.
    To explore the effects of such a technological breakthrough, we introduce a renewable energy
firm that must invest in capacity today to potentially supply energy in the future. With
probability pBT a breakthrough technology is developed in period 1, which allows renewable
energy firms to serve all sectors of the economy, and thus to compete with fossil fuel firms
everywhere. Conversely, with probability 1−pBT , no such breakthrough happens, and renewable
firms can only serve a fraction q of future energy demand. This captures the fact that current
renewable technologies cannot currently serve some sectors of the economy: for example, steel
production or maritime and air transportation cannot be effectively electrified (Williams et al.,
2021). Similarly, the lack of large-scale energy storage combined with the intermittency of solar
and wind energy production means that, with current technologies, some energy demand can
only be met via fossil fuels (see Gowrisankaran et al., 2016). This scenario is called the Current
Technology (CT) state. For simplicity, we consider the case where q = 0, meaning that in the
absence of a technological breakthrough, renewable firms are unable to supply any energy.6
    The key choice of this renewable firm is how much production capacity to install in period
0, which can then (potentially) be used in period 1. We assume that installing an amount of
                                            1 2
production capacity C has a convex cost 2δ    C , where δ > 0, and that this capacity can then be
used to produce energy in period 1 at zero marginal cost (this captures the fact that wind, solar,
and hydro energy production do not require to purchase fuels to operate). Hence, in period 1,
the green firm will always choose to activate its full production capacity in the BT state.
    The renewable firm maximizes expected profits, taking as given the price of energy in the BT
state, P1,BT , which is the only market where it is able to sell. The firm’s problem is therefore:

                                               1 2
                                      max −       C + pBT CP1,BT ,                                      (10)
                                      C≥0      2δ

which implies that the optimal installed capacity by the renewable firm at time 0 is

                                             C = pBT δP1,BT .                                           (11)

We derive the following result:

Proposition 5. Suppose that both fossil fuel firms fully exhaust their production capacity in
both states in period 1. Then, increases in the probability of the Breakthrough Technology state
cause a reduction in the date-0 energy price. That is, dpdPBT
                                                            0
                                                              < 0.
If the incumbent fossil fuel firm fully exhausts its production capacity in the Current Technology
state only (and thus has some stranded assets in the Breakthrough Technology state), then the
effect of increases in the probability of the Breakthrough Technology state on the date-0 energy
price is in general ambiguous. However, we have dpdPBT  0
                                                           < 0 as pBT → 1.

The Breakthrough Technology state features lower profits for fossil fuel firms because of the
competition from the renewable sector. If the difference in energy prices across states is not very
large—perhaps because of limited capacity investment by renewable firms—then it is optimal
   6
    In the richer model presented in the next section, we allow renewable energy firms to also supply some of
the energy demand even with current technologies, but few additional insights derive from this complication.


                                                     14
for the incumbent firm to fully exhaust its inventory in both states. In that case, inventory
decisions are made by taking into account the weighted average prices of energy across both the
BT and the CT states, similar to equation (7) in the case of carbon taxes. As pBT increases,
renewable firms invest more in production capacity, as they expect to be able to sell in the future
with higher probability. The expected energy price in the BT state therefore falls, because of the
higher supply of clean energy. The probability of that state also increases. As a consequence,
the incumbent’s expected value of carrying inventory into the future falls, and it is thus optimal
for this firm to increase energy supply in period 0, pushing down period-0 energy prices.
     If instead the price difference across the two states is very large, perhaps due to the low cost
of installing renewable capacity at date 0, this result can be overturned. As pBT increases, the
renewable firm installs more and more capacity. Eventually, the resulting energy price in the
BT state falls so much that it is no longer profitable for the fossil fuel incumbent to extract its
full reserves: similar to the case where the carbon tax is very high, some of the incumbent’s oil
reserves will be stranded in the BT state. Just like in the case of a high carbon tax (equation 9),
the incumbent’s marginal inventory decisions will no longer take into account the BT price, but
will instead be based on the price in the CT state—the only state the incumbent is expecting to
sell its marginal unit of inventory—multiplied by the probability of that state: (1 − pBT )P1,CT .
     Since the entrant’s capacity investments continue to decline as pBT increases, expected prices
in the CT state actually increase as pBT increases. As a result, the effect of increases in pBT
on the expected period-1 value of a unit of oil reserves to the incumbent, (1 − pBT )P1,CT , is
ambiguous. The key difference with the carbon tax case is that in the breakthrough technology
case, the increase in the price the incumbent can obtain the CT state (which increases in pBT )
is offset by a decreasing likelihood of the CT state (which is 1 − pBT ). We prove that for high
enough pBT the probability of the CT state is sufficiently low that even if energy prices in that
state are increasing in in pBT , it is optimal for the incumbent to reduce its future inventory.
     As before, increases in pBT generally lead to declining valuations for energy firms, with larger
declines for entrants than for incumbents with developed reserves. Valuations of renewable
energy providers are increasing in pBT . Our empirical analysis will find evidence consistent
with these predictions.

1.6   General Insight: Uncertainty, Stranded Assets, and the Green Paradox
The literature studying climate transition risks has highlighted the possibility that, in response
to anticipated future transition risk realizations, fossil fuel firms may end up increasing their
current supply, thus lowering prices and increasing today’s emissions (the “green paradox”).
    Our model shows that under certain conditions, this effect can actually be reversed: worsen-
ing expectations related to future transition risk realizations can actually induce fossil fuel firms
to reduce current energy supply, thus causing an increase in energy prices. In order for this
to happen, there needs to be some uncertainty related to the realization of climate transition
risks. In particular, there should be some states of the world with transition risk realizations
characterized by low profits for fossil fuel companies, in order to discourage investments in new
production capacity, and some states where transition risks do not materialize and the remain-
ing oil producers can benefit from high energy prices. In addition, some of the the low-profit
states should leave assets stranded for some firms, giving a positive value to the real option of
not fully extracting the oil.


                                                 15
1.7   Optimal carbon tax policy
In the previous section, we separated the discussion of a possible technological breakthrough
in green energy production from that related to the possible introduction of carbon taxes. We
now argue that these two sources of transition risk are, in fact, closely related. Indeed, the state
of the world where a breakthrough in renewable technologies occurs is likely the same state
where we can expect to have high carbon taxes. This is because carbon taxes are policy choices,
and policy makers will be more willing to impose high carbon taxes to reduce greenhouse gas
emissions in states of the world when reliable and affordable sources of clean energy are available.
    Let us expand on this. Suppose that fossil fuel emissions, f1,s in each state s ∈ {BT, CT },
                        2 , with λ > 0, and assume that consumers have preferences over energy
entail a social cost λf1,s
consumption represented by a CRRA utility function with parameter γ > 1. Let e1,s denote
total energy consumption. We can therefore define social welfare in each state as
                                               1−γ
                                              e1,s −1         λ 2
                                     W1,s =               −    f .                                (12)
                                                1−γ           2 1,s

We then assume that a benevolent social planner chooses a carbon tax in each state in order to
maximize social welfare, that is by solving

                                              max W1,s .                                          (13)
                                            τ1,s ∈[0,1]


Two observations are in order. First, in the CT state, energy consumption coincides with
carbon emissions, since fossil fuel firms are the only energy providers in the economy. Second,
we assume that the planner chooses the tax in period 1 after the state is realized. That is,
we do not assume that the planner announces the period-1 carbon tax in period 0 in order
to maximize expected ex-ante welfare. This is because the optimal ex-ante tax might not
necessarily be optimal ex-post, so that the planner might have an incentive to deviate once the
uncertainty about the technological state of the world is resolved. We assume that the agents
in the economy anticipate this time-consistency problem, and expect carbon taxes to be set
optimally in each state. Optimal taxes are thus consistent with a subgame perfect equilibrium.
    We derive the following result related to the optimal carbon tax policy.
Proposition 6. It is optimal for the social planner to impose a higher carbon tax in the Break-
                                          ∗
through Technology scenario. That is, τ1,BT        ∗
                                               > τ1,CT . Furthermore, the optimal tax rates are
increasing in the social cost of carbon emissions, λ.
The intuition is that the Breakthrough Technology state is characterized by low energy prices
and large supply of clean energy from the renewable sector. Therefore, the marginal utility of
energy consumption is lower, and the social planner is willing to reduce fossil fuel production
with a high carbon tax in order to reduce emissions. Conversely, in the Current Technology
state, the economy still fully relies on fossil fuel producers to satisfy its energy supply. Therefore,
large carbon taxes substantially increase prices and are thus harmful to consumers. As a result,
the planner is less willing to limit emissions in order to keep energy prices low. It follows that a
lower carbon tax is implemented compared to the BT state. Note furthermore that announcing
high taxes in the CT state ex-ante would not be an equilibrium in a subgame-perfect sense, as
agents in the economy would correctly anticipate the high economic costs associated with high
taxes in that state, and would therefore not view such announcements as credible.

                                                   16
2        Full Model
In this section, we introduce our full model of the energy sector that jointly incorporates the
three transition risks discussed above. We argue that the previous results still hold in this more
general model, and use numerical examples to illustrate how additional equilibrium outcomes
change with the various transition risks that we consider.

2.1        Summary of Setup
The model setup is similar to the one described in the previous section. In particular, we
denote with pBT the probability that the Breakthrough Technology scenario occurs, which
allows renewable energy producers to serve all sectors of the economy. Motivated by the previous
section, we assume that the government may impose a tax on new fossil fuel drilling in period
0, τ̄0 , and a carbon tax in period 1, but only in case the BT scenario realizes: τ1,BT .
     One difference with the simpler model presented before is that we allow the renewable energy
sector to serve some (but not all) sectors of the economy even if the technological breakthrough
does not occur (1 > q > 0). Therefore, the Current Technology scenario is now characterized
by an “Electrifiable market” (E), where both fossil fuel producers and renewable firms compete,
and a “Non-Electrifiable market” (NE), where all energy supply has to come from fossil fuels.
Importantly, energy prices can be different across these two markets, and we will investigate
how the various transition risks affect the gap in energy prices across them.
     The decision problems of the various firms in the economy are analogous to those in the
previous section. The main difference is that if the CT state realizes, then renewable firms
are only allowed to sell in the electrifiable market, and fossil fuel firms can sell in both the
electrifiable and non-electrifiable markets. We refer to Appendix A for the details of the full
model, where we argue that fossil fuel firms will only sell in the non-electrifiable market of the
CT state in equilibrium. The timeline of the model is summarized in Figure 2.

2.2        Main Model Results
We formalize at the outset that the key results that we derived in Section 1 continue to hold.
In particular, we have the following proposition.

Proposition 7. In the general model, the price of energy in period 0 is affected by the various
transition risks in the following way:

        • An increase in taxes on new fossil fuel production capacity, τ̄0 , increases the price of
          energy in period 0.

        • An increase in the probability of a technological breakthrough in renewable energy, pBT ,
          generally decreases the price of energy in period 0, although the response can be uncertain.7

        • For low enough carbon taxes, τ1,BT , further increases in the tax rate reduce the energy
          price in period 0. For high enough carbon taxes, further increases in the tax rate increase
          the energy price.
    7
    The same discussion as in Section 1.5 applies. We verify numerically using the full model that the date-0
energy price is generally decreasing in the transition probability for most parameter values.




                                                     17
                                                              t = 1: Breakthrough Technology (BT) Scenario
                                                                 • Government imposes taxes on carbon emissions, τ1 ≥ 0.
                                                                 • All producers compete in integrated market for energy.



t=0:
  • Government imposes tax on new fossil fuel                     pBT
    capacity, τ̄0 ≥ 0.
  • Incumbent fossil fuel firm supplies energy.
  • Entrant fossil fuel firm installs production
    capacity.                                                    1−p
                                                                        BT
  • Renewable energy firm installs production
    capacity.



                                                              t = 1: Current Technology (CT) Scenario
                                                                 • Fossil fuel firms supply in the Non-Electrifiable market.
                                                                 • Green firm supplies in the Electrifiable market.

                                           Figure 2: Timeline of the model.


       We now use the model to illustrate through numerical analyses how the various transition risks
       affect all the endogenous variables, in order to better understand the economic mechanisms
       that drive the response of energy prices. All the numerical examples are based on the following
       calibration: f¯0I = 1.7, κ1 = 0.4, κ2 = 0.15, δ = 0.3, W = 3, q = 0.2, τ1,BT = τ̄0 = 0 (except
       for the case in which we study changes in the tax rates). We choose parameters such that the
       incumbent fossil fuel firm is not always unconstrained in all states, and has more production
       capacity than the entrant firm in period 1, consistent with Assumptions 1 and 2 above.

       2.3   Analysis of Taxes on New Fossil Fuel Production Capacity
       We first consider the effects of changes in the tax on new fossil fuel production capacity, τ̄0 . Fig-
       ure 3 shows how energy prices and other equilibrium quantities vary with this policy instrument
       for a model calibration that fixes the probability of a technological breakthrough at pBT = 0.5.
           To organize the various results, we start by describing the time-0 decisions of the different
       energy firms that lead to their period-1 energy production capacities. Specifically, Panel D shows
       the time-1 production capacity of the different energy firms as a function of τ̄0 . As expected,
       an increase in the tax on new fossil fuel capacity development leads to a decline in the period-1
       capacity developed by new entrants. This has a direct effect on energy prices in period 1, shown
       in Panel B: the reduction in capacity by new entrants raises prices in all period-1 markets where
       fossil fuel firms operate (the integrated market in the BT state and the NE market in the CT
       state). In turn, in response to higher prices in the BT scenario, renewable firms increase their
       period-1 capacity (Panel D), leading to a declining price in the CT-E market where they would
       be only energy supplier (with fossil fuel firms serving the higher-priced CT-NE market).
           Panel B highlights that transition risks can have rich implications on energy prices in dif-
       ferent states of the world. Importantly, at higher levels of taxes, the price differences across the
       electrifiable and non-electrifiable markets in the CT state increase. This divergence may have


                                                         18
                      A) Time-0 Price                                                    B) Time-1 Prices

 3.17                                                             3.00

 3.15                                                             2.75
                                                                  2.50
 3.12
                                                                  2.25
 3.10
                                                                  2.00                                        BT Price
 3.08                                                                                                         CT-E Price
                                                                  1.75                                        CT-NE Price
 3.05                                                             1.50
 3.02                                                             1.25

        0.0     0.2       0.4     0.6      0.8        1.0                0.0       0.2      0.4      0.6      0.8      1.0
              C) Time-0 Fossil Fuel Supply                                     D) Time-1 Energy Supply Capacity

 0.99                                                             0.70
                                                                  0.60
 0.98
                                                                  0.50
 0.97                                                             0.40
                                                                                                     Entrant Capacity
 0.96                                                             0.30                               Incumbent Capacity
                                                                                                     Renewable Capacity
                                                                  0.20
 0.95
                                                                  0.10
 0.94                                                             0.00
        0.0     0.2       0.4     0.6      0.8        1.0                0.0       0.2      0.4      0.6      0.8      1.0
                E) Total Expected Profits                                                 F) Emissions
 1.18         Incumbent                           Entrant 1.0 1.00
              Renewable
                                                                  0.98
 1.15
                                                            0.8
                                                                  0.95
 1.12
 1.10                                                       0.6 0.93
                                                                0.90
 1.08                                                       0.4 0.88
 1.05                                                             0.85
                                                            0.2                  T0 Emissions
 1.03                                                             0.83
                                                                                 T1 Expected Emissions
                                                                                 Total
 1.00                                                       0.0 0.80
        0.0     0.2       0.4     0.6       0.8       1.0                0.0       0.2       0.4     0.6       0.8     1.0
                   Tax rate on new capacity                                           Tax rate on new capacity

Figure 3: Equilibrium effects of changes in the tax rate on new production capacity. Note that profits
for each producer are normalized by their profits for τ̄0 = 0, and emissions are normalized for each period and
total by the corresponding value for τ̄0 = 0. Profits for the entrant fossil fuel firm in Panel E are shown on the
right axis. BT scenario probability is fixed at pBT = 0.5.



                                                            19
important implications for the composition of economic activity in the absence of a technological
breakthrough, as different firms and sectors may and up facing different costs depending on the
ability to electrify (and thus their access cheap renewable energy). It also may lead to volatility
of energy costs over time, as energy consumers need to shift from renewables to fossil fuels when
renewable sources are unavailable (due to intermittency of the renewables production).
    Incumbents also adjust their time-0 decision when taxes on the development of new oil
capacity increase. As described in Section 1.2, higher expected prices in the BT state and the
CT-NE market lead incumbents to increase their time-1 inventory (Panel D). They do so by
supplying less energy today (Panel C). The time-0 energy price therefore increases (Panel A).
    Finally, Panel E shows expected profits for the different energy firms. Increased drilling
restrictions benefit incumbents as well as renewable energy firms, both of which now face less
competition. Valuations of new entrants (shown on the right axis in Panel E) decline as their
investment activities get taxed at higher rates. Panel F shows that restrictions on drilling
activities are successful at reducing emissions at both time 0 and at time 1.

2.4    Analysis of Changes in the Probability of a Technological Breakthrough
We next study the effects of changes in the probability of a technological breakthrough that
allows the renewable sector to supply energy to the entire economy, represented by the parameter
pBT . We assume throughout this simulation that carbon taxes (τ1,BT ) and production capacity
taxes (τ̄0 ) are zero. Figure 4 shows how equilibrium outcomes change as pBT increases.
    As the probability of the Breakthrough Technology scenario increases, the renewable firm
increases its installed capacity (Panel D). This results from the fact that the renewable firm
views it as more likely that it will be able to supply energy to the entire economy in period 1,
and hence wants to increase its capacity to capture this additional demand.
    In contrast, both fossil fuel firms anticipate that, as pBT increases, they will face increased
competition from the renewable sector, and will face that competition with higher probability.
The new entrant reduces its investment, while the incumbent reduces its time-1 inventory (Panel
D), choosing instead to increase its time-0 extraction (Panel C). As a result, time-0 prices fall
(Panel A), and time-0 emissions rise (Panel F), consistent with predictions from the “green
paradox” literature.8 On the flip side, expected time-1 emissions and overall expected emissions
across the two periods decline. However, since period-0 emissions are more damaging to the
climate than period-1 emissions—they contribute to global warming both in period 0 and in
period 1—the aggregate effects on the climate are uncertain.
    The firms’ production and investment responses to increases in pBT have the following
effects on period-1 equilibrium prices, shown in Panel B. First, the increasing supply of green
energy pushes the period-1 price down in both markets where renewable energy firms are active,
the BT market as well as the CT-E market. Second, the lower installed capacity from fossil
fuel entrants and the reduced period-1 inventory of the incumbent increase period-1 prices in
the CT-NE market. The different dynamics of energy prices between the electrifiable and non-
electrifiable markets arise due to the fact that, if the technological breakthrough does not occur,
renewable firms will be unable to supply energy to the non-electrifiable sectors of the economy,
and the supply from the fossil fuel sector is also lower.
   8
     As section 1.5 reports, it is possible that, for some range of pBT , the time-0 price of energy is actually
increasing in pBT , for a mechanism similar to that discussed in the case of carbon taxes: the lower supply from
the new entrant may induce incumbents to supply less, not more, at time 0.


                                                      20
                          A) Time-0 Price                                         B) Time-1 Prices
                                                            2.75
 3.06
                                                            2.50
 3.04
                                                            2.25
 3.02
 3.00                                                       2.00

 2.98                                                       1.75                                          BT Price
                                                                                                          CT-E Price
 2.96                                                       1.50                                          CT-NE Price
 2.94                                                       1.25
 2.92
                                                            1.00
        0.0      0.2        0.4     0.6       0.8    1.0           0.0      0.2      0.4         0.6     0.8      1.0
                 C) Time-0 Fossil Fuel Supply                            D) Time-1 Energy Supply Capacity
 1.03
                                                            0.70

 1.02
                                                            0.60
 1.01
                                                            0.50
 1.00                                                                                              Entrant Capacity
                                                            0.40                                   Incumbent Capacity
                                                                                                   Renewable Capacity
 0.99
                                                            0.30
 0.98
                                                            0.20
        0.0      0.2        0.4     0.6       0.8    1.0           0.0      0.2      0.4         0.6     0.8      1.0
                   E) Total Expected Profits                                         F) Emissions
                                                            1.06
 2.00         Entrant                                                    T0 Emissions
              Incumbent                                     1.04         T1 Expected Emissions
 1.80         Renewable                                                  Total
                                                            1.02
 1.60                                                       1.00
 1.40                                                       0.98
 1.20                                                       0.96

 1.00                                                       0.94
                                                            0.92
 0.80
                                                            0.90
        0.0      0.2       0.4      0.6        0.8   1.0           0.0      0.2       0.4      0.6        0.8     1.0
                   Breakthrough probability (pBT)                             Breakthrough probability (pBT)

Figure 4: Equilibrium effects of changes in the probability of a technological breakthrough, pBT .
Note that profits for each producer are normalized by their profits for pBT = 0, and emissions are normalized for
each period and total by the corresponding value for pBT = 0.




                                                           21
    Expected profits (and hence valuations) of both types of fossil fuel firms decline as pBT
increases, with larger negative effects on the valuations of new entrants (Panel F). Renewable
firms instead experience an increase in their valuations, as their future expected profits increase
with the technological breakthrough becoming more likely.

2.5    Analysis of Changes in the Tax on Fossil Fuel Emissions
Finally, we turn to an analysis of the effects of the introduction of a tax on carbon emissions
in the BT state (taxes are always zero in the CT state).9 Figure 5 shows how the equilibrium
outcomes in the model change as the tax rate τ1,BT on carbon emissions in the BT scenario
increases for a fixed value of the breakthrough probability (pBT = 0.5).
    We can immediately note the non-monotonicity of the time-0 energy price as a function of
the carbon tax (Panel A), consistent with Proposition 3: for low levels of the tax, tax increases
reduce the current energy price; if the tax rate is high enough, then further increases will
increase the current energy price. As explained in Section 1.4, this non-monotonicity is due to
the uncertainty in the level of the tax, and a calculation by incumbents that it may be worth
increasing time-1 inventory to profit in states of the world where the carbon tax is not enacted
and oil is scarce and valuable, even at the cost of having stranded oil if the tax is enacted.
    To dig deeper into this mechanism, Figure 6 plots the fraction of incumbents’ oil that is
stranded in the BT state. For low values of the carbon tax, the incumbent is fully exhausting
its production capacity in the BT state, so no oil is stranded. This corresponds to the range (in
this calibration) of a carbon tax between 0 and 0.2. As shown in Panels A, C, and F of Figure 5,
in this range we see that the carbon tax induces higher time-0 energy supply and lower time-0
energy prices, leading to an increase in emissions (the “green paradox”).
    Once the tax rate rises above 0.2 (τstrand ), it becomes unprofitable for the incumbent to
extract all its inventory in the BT state, leaving the incumbent with some stranded oil inventory
in that state (Figure 6). As discussed in Section 1.4, at that point, further increases in the tax
have no further direct effects on the incumbent’s marginal inventory decision, since it will not
in any case extract its marginal inventory in the BT state (when the tax is enacted). But the
increase in the carbon tax still discourages the entrant from installing new capacity (Panel D,
Figure 5). In turn, this makes oil scarcer in the CT-NE market, raising the price in that market
(Panel B) and incentivizing the incumbent to actually increase its period-1 inventory (Panel
D). This leads to lower time-0 extraction and a higher time-0 price (Panels A and C).
    To these mechanics, present already in the simple model presented in Section 1.4, the full
model adds the behavior of renewable energy firms. The increase in carbon taxes induces
renewable firms to increase their time-0 investment, driven by their higher expected profits if
the BT state materializes. In turn, this leads to a decrease in energy price in the CT-E market.
Therefore, expectations about carbon taxes also increase the gap between energy prices in the
two markets in the Current Technology scenario (visible in Panel B), with the possible across-
industry reallocation effects discussed above.
    Note that, eventually, the tax rate in the BT scenario becomes so high that even entrants
find it optimal to leave some assets stranded in the BT state. Therefore, further changes in the
tax rate do not change the optimally installed production capacity, and consequently do not
   9
     In Appendix C we show that the results in this section are robust to assuming that carbon taxes are on
production quantities of fossil fuel firms rather than on their sales.



                                                    22
                          A) Time-0 Price                                          B) Time-1 Prices
                                                           4.00         BT Price
                                                                        CT-E Price
 3.01                                                      3.50         CT-NE Price
                                                                        BT Price, Post Tax
                                                           3.00
 3.00
                                                           2.50
 2.99                                                      2.00
                                                           1.50
 2.98                                                      1.00
                                                           0.50
 2.97
                                                           0.00
        0.0      0.2        0.4     0.6      0.8    1.0           0.0      0.2        0.4       0.6     0.8      1.0
                 C) Time-0 Fossil Fuel Supply                           D) Time-1 Energy Supply Capacity
 1.01                                                      0.70
 1.01
                                                           0.60
 1.01
 1.00                                                      0.50
 1.00                                                                                             Entrant Capacity
                                                           0.40                                   Incumbent Capacity
 1.00                                                                                             Renewable Capacity
 1.00                                                      0.30

 1.00                                                      0.20
 0.99
        0.0      0.2        0.4     0.6      0.8    1.0           0.0      0.2        0.4       0.6     0.8      1.0
                   E) Total Expected Profits                                         F) Emissions
 2.25         Entrant                                      1.00
              Incumbent
 2.00         Renewable
                                                           0.90
 1.75
 1.50                                                      0.80

 1.25                                                      0.70
 1.00
                                                           0.60
 0.75                                                                   T0 Emissions
                                                           0.50         T1 Expected Emissions
 0.50                                                                   Total
        0.0      0.2      0.4        0.6      0.8   1.0           0.0      0.2      0.4        0.6      0.8      1.0
                  Carbon tax rate in BT scenario                            Carbon tax rate in BT scenario

Figure 5: Equilibrium effects of changes in BT carbon tax rate. Note that profits for each producer
are normalized by their profits for τ1,BT = 0, and emissions are normalized for each period and total by the
corresponding value for τ1,BT = 0. BT scenario probability is fixed at pBT = 0.5.




                                                          23
                                                  % Stranded Assets                                  Fossil Fuel Incumbent: Period 1 Profits in CT Scenario
                                40
                                                                                              1.30


                                                                                              1.28
                                30
                                                                                              1.26


                                                                                              1.24
                                20
                                                                                              1.22


                                                                                              1.20
                                10
                                                                                              1.18


                                                                                              1.16
                                0
                                     0.0   0.2        0.4            0.6          0.8   1.0           0.0       0.2        0.4            0.6          0.8   1.0
                                                 Carbon tax rate in BT scenario                                       Carbon tax rate in BT scenario


Figure 6: Fossil fuel stranded assets in the BT scenario as a function of the tax rate in the BT scenario. BT
scenario probability is fixed at pBT = 0.5.


affect the price in the CT scenario and the incumbent’s incentive to increase its inventory. This
corresponds to the rightmost region of Figure 5, where the response of period-0 price and fossil
fuel supply to the carbon tax becomes flat.
    Panel E of Figure 5 also shows that news about future carbon taxes have a negative effect
on the profits of fossil fuel producers, with the effect being more negative for the entrant than
for the incumbent firm. Renewable firms, on the other hand, experience an increase in their
expected profits as the carbon tax increases.


3     Empirical Analysis
We now test the main empirical implications of the model. We first study how expectations
about climate transition risk realizations affect the valuations of the different types of energy
firms, before analyzing how transition risks affect oil prices. We explore differential effects on
the valuations of renewable energy firms and on fossil fuel firms positioned on a continuum from
entrants to incumbents according to their fraction of developed reserves.
    Specifically, we study how these asset prices respond to news about each of the three tran-
sition risks studied above, which we measure using high-frequency climate transition risk news
indices that we construct using data from the New York Times (NYT).

3.1    Climate Transition News Indices
We build our climate transition news indices by analyzing news coverage in the NYT using
GPT-4o Mini, a state-of-the-art language model created by OpenAI. We begin by summarizing
how we construct these climate news indices, and provide additional details in Appendix D.
    We start by obtaining all NYT articles covering a 12-year period between 2012 and 2023
via LexisNexis. We narrow our focus to the following sections in the NYT: “Business Finan-
cial”, “National”, “Foreign”, “Metropolitan”, “Science”, “Climate”, “U.S.”, “Editorial”, and


                                                           24
“Business”. This excludes sections such as “Travel” as well as the “Opinion” section to better
capture direct news such as new policy announcements. From these articles, we select those
containing at least one of the following keywords related to the three types of transition risks
we are interested in studying: “carbon,” “renewable,” “drilling,” “fossil,” “oil and gas,” “emis-
sions,” “solar,” or “pipeline”. This approach extracts a broad set of 33,960 articles, including
many that are unrelated to climate transition risks.
    To construct our transition risk measures, we upload each article to the GPT-4o Mini model,
along with a prompt to identify whether the article contains news about a climate transition
risk, to determine the type of transition risk, and to quantify the importance of the content.
The prompts are provided in Appendix D. We explore three types of transition risks: (1) carbon
pricing policy; (2) the probability of technological breakthroughs in renewable energy or battery
storage technology; (3) regulations affecting the expansion of fossil fuel production capacity.
    The outcome of the GPT processing step yields, for each article, a score for each transition
risk type, with positive scores indicating an increasing transition risk and negative scores a
decreasing risk; irrelevant articles get a score of 0. Larger absolute scores are assigned to risks
that GPT determines to be more likely or more important based on the content of the articles
(see Appendix D). Within each of the three transition risk categories, we aggregate the scores
by taking the sum across all articles in a week,10 creating the NYT-Emission Cost News Index,
the NYT-Renewable Breakthrough News Index, and the NYT-Oil Capacity News Index.
    Figure 1 plots the time series of the three news indexes, with labels indicating important
events. The NYT-Emission Cost News Index and the NYT-Oil Capacity News Index were, on
average, more positive during the Obama and Biden periods, and more negative during the
Trump administration. The NYT-Emission Cost News Index spikes around significant climate-
related events, such as the first proposal of the Clean Power Plan in 2014, its repeal proposal
in 2017, and Biden rejoining the Paris Agreement in 2021. The NYT-Oil Capacity News Index
spikes (in both directions) around regulations which influence fossil fuel production, like the
the Trump administration’s approval of offshore oil drilling in 2017, the review of the Keystone
XL oil pipeline in 2017, and its permit revocation in 2021 by the Biden administration. The
intensity of the NYT-Renewable Breakthrough News Index is generally positive and has increased
in recent years, with spikes around events favoring renewable energy or announcing technological
breakthroughs (e.g., the unveiling of zinc air batteries making energy storage more affordable
in 2018, and China scaling up production of sodium batteries in 2023).
    The weekly correlations between the three climate transition news indices are positive but
moderate in size, as reported in Table 2. This suggests that despite some common events
affecting all three types of transition risks, they each capture distinct concepts. The correlations
between our news indices and existing measures of climate transition risk introduced by Ardia
et al. (2023), Faccini et al. (2023) and Bua et al. (2024) are all relatively small, and mostly
positive as reported in Table 2.11 Armed with these high-frequency indices of transition risk,
we now move to the empirical tests of the implications of our model.
  10
     We include news from Saturday and Sunday in the following week since this news would only be reflected on
Monday stock prices once the market opens.
  11
     While a variety of transition risk measures exist in the literature, we choose to build our own measures to
separately identify the different types of transition risk that are analyzed in our theoretical model.




                                                      25
                                          Table 2: Index Correlations

 XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX                              XXX        XXX    XXX     XXX      XXX     XXX
                                                              (1)        (2)    (3)     (4)      (5)     (6)
 (1) NYT-EmissionCostNews                                     1.00
 (2) NYT-RenewableBTNews                                      0.22      1.00
 (3) NYT-OilCapacityNews                                      0.49      0.23   1.00
 (4) Bua-TransitionRisk                                       0.11      0.06   0.12    1.00
 (5) Faccini-ClimatePolicy                                    0.37      0.19   0.35    0.13     1.00
 (6) Ardia-MediaClimateChangeConcern                          -0.02     0.21   0.16    -0.08    0.46     1.00


3.2    Stock Price Reactions of Energy Firms
We start our analysis by studying the model’s predictions for energy firms’ stock price response
to transition risk news. We obtain prices of stocks listed on the NYSE, AMEX and NASDAQ
with data available on CRSP and industry classification (GICS codes) from Compustat.
    We use the GICS codes to identify fossil fuel firms, focusing on companies engaged in the
exploration and production of oil and gas (see more details in Appendix D). This helps us
identify 160 fossil fuel firms. Instead of having distinct categories for entrants and incumbents,
we place these fossil fuel firms on a continuum according to the characteristics of their reserves.
Specifically, for each fossil fuel firm and year, we compute their “developed ratio,” which we
define as the ratio between the amount of proved developed reserves for oil, natural gas, and
natural gas liquids in barrel of oil equivalents (BOE) and the amount of total proved reserves for
these resources in BOE, obtained from Compustat and the SEC’s EDGAR database. Recall that
from the model, the key difference between incumbents and entrants was the extent of capital
expenditure required to extract oil. The distinction between developed and undeveloped reserves
captures this difference well. As described, from example, by the Chevron 10-k statement:
“Proved developed reserves represent volumes expected to be recovered through existing wells
with existing equipment and operating methods. Proved undeveloped reserves are volumes
expected to be recovered from new wells on undrilled proved acreage, or from existing wells
where a relatively major expenditure is required for recompletion.”
    Firms with a higher “developed ratio” have already developed more of their reserves, sug-
gesting they can extract this capacity without substantial new investments, similar to the in-
cumbents in the model. Conversely, firms with a lower “developed ratio” have not yet built
the infrastructure to develop most of their reserves, similar to new entrants in the model. The
median developed ratio in our sample is 0.65, with a 10–90 percentile range of 0.27 to 1.
    To identify renewable energy firms, we use the holdings of the Invesco Solar ETF and the
First Trust Global Wind Energy ETF, which include companies in the solar and wind energy
industry respectively. This helps us identify 19 companies listed on U.S. stock exchanges which
we categorize as renewable companies.12
Specification. We base our empirical analysis of stock prices on the following regression:

            Ri,t = αk + γi + β1,k νk,t Fosi + β2,k νk,t Fosi DevRati,t + β3,k νk,t Reni + ϵk,i,t ,         (14)
  12
    U.S.-listed oil and gas companies do not generally have substantial investments in renewable energy sources,
in contrast to some of their European competitors (van Benthem et al., 2022).




                                                      26
where Ri,t is the market-hedged return of stock i at week t,13 and γi represents firm fixed effects.
To estimate the stock-price response to news about transition risks, we first estimate an AR(1)
model for each news index k using weekly data; we refer to the AR(1) innovations from this
time-series model as νk,t . We focus on AR(1) innovations because returns should reflect the
unexpected component of the news, though the low persistence of the news series means that
results are similar if we include the index directly instead of the innovations. We scale the
residuals by their sample standard deviation to make magnitudes comparable across transition
news indices. In regression 14, we interact these news index residuals νk,t with dummies for fossil
fuel companies (Fosi ) and renewable companies (Reni ). Finally, we include in the regression the
interaction of the next index innovations with the fossil fuel dummy and the developed ratio of
firm i at time t, DevRati,t .
Results. Table 3 reports the results of regression 14. For readability, the table reports only
the coefficients that involve the transition news term νk,t . The findings are highly consistent
with our theoretical predictions.
    First, we find that, consistent with the theory, on average renewable energy companies earn a
positive return in weeks with news reporting increases of cost of emissions, or a higher probability
of a renewable breakthrough. Quantitatively, a one-standard-deviation higher innovation in
the NYT-Emission Cost News Index is associated with a 2.6 ppt higher return for renewable
companies in that week. Renewable energy firms also outperform upon news about restrictions
of new oil capacity, though these estimates are not statistically significant.
                                      Table 3: Stock Returns and NYT Index

 XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX                              XXXXXX
                                                        Emission Cost          XXXXXX
                                                                         Renewable Breakthrough      XXXXXX
                                                                                                    Oil Capacity
                                                             (1)                   (2)                   (3)
 Fossil Fuel Company × Index AR(1) Innovation              -0.0054∗∗            -0.0079∗∗∗            -0.0044∗∗
                                                            (0.0026)             (0.0021)              (0.0022)
 Fossil Fuel Company × Index AR(1) Innovation ×            0.0094∗∗             0.0118∗∗∗             0.0073∗∗
 Developed Ratio                                           (0.0037)             (0.0032)              (0.0034)
 Renewable × Index AR(1) Innovation                        0.0026∗∗             0.0027∗∗∗              0.0012
                                                           (0.0011)             (0.0007)              (0.0009)
 Company FE                                                   Yes                  Yes                  Yes
 Remove Market from Stock Returns                             Yes                  Yes                  Yes
 R2                                                           0.607               0.626                0.584
 Observations                                                 50851               50851                50851

Note: Regression (1) shows coefficients of regressing stock returns on AR(1) innovations of NYT-Emission Cost
News Index interacted with dummies indicating fossil fuel and renewable firms, as well as the interaction between
the fossil fuel dummy and the developed ratio, controlling for firm fixed effects. Regression (2) and (3) instead
show coefficients of regressing stock returns on AR(1) innovations of the NYT-Renewable Breakthrough News
Index and AR(1) innovations of the NYT-Oil Capacity News Index respectively. We removed market influences
from stock returns by computing the market beta via a 3-year rolling window for each firm, then subtracting the
beta times the market returns from firms’ stock returns. We also dropped observations with stock price < $1 if
it was preceded by a month of stock prices < $1. Standard errors are in parentheses and are clustered at the
company level. Significance levels: * (p<0.10), ** (p<0.05), *** (p<0.01).


   The price responses of fossil fuel stocks correspond closely to our theoretical predictions.
Upon the arrival of news about each of the transition risks, we find that companies with a low
developed ratio face a significant drop in stock prices, while the stock prices of companies with
  13
       We compute rolling 3-year market beta for each firm, and use it to hedge the market exposure of each stock.



                                                         27
a higher developed ratio drop by less, and might even increase. This finding is exactly in line
with the predictions of the model: entrants are hurt more by transition risks than incumbents.
    Appendix D.4 reports a number of robustness tests on this analysis. In particular, the
results are robust to reconstructing the indices based on alternative scaling methods. We also
show that our results are similar when we: remove section filtering in the construction of the
news indices; change the window used to estimate the market beta; and when we use the oil
developed reserves ratio rather than the total developed reserves ratio.

3.3     Oil Futures Price Response to Transition News
We next study the effects of transition risk realizations on energy prices, with a focus on the
effect on oil futures. Contrary to the previous analysis, which exploits the power of the cross-
section of different types of energy firms, this is essentially a time-series macroeconomic analysis,
where isolating the effects of transition risk from other confounding events (e.g., geopolitical
events) is significantly harder. Because of this, and because some of the model’s predictions
with respect to oil prices are ambiguous, we expect the results in this section to be somewhat
weaker than those in the previous section. We employ the following specification:

                          fth = α + β1 νtEC + β2 νtBT + β2 νtOC + Controlst + ϵt ,

where fth denotes percentage change in the WTI oil futures price at maturity h from t − 1 to t,
νtEC represents the AR(1) innovations of the NYT-Emission Cost News Index, νtBT represents
the AR(1) innovations of the NYT-Renewable Breakthrough News Index, and νtOC represents
the AR(1) innovations of the NYT-Oil Capacity News Index. We scale each residual by the
full-sample standard deviation to make magnitudes comparable across the three indices. The
regression also includes controls for other key determinants of oil prices, described in more
detail below. To align with the monthly frequency of these controls and much of the associated
analysis of oil price movements in the literature, we run this regression at the monthly frequency
by aggregating the news indices to a monthly frequency, and then obtain the residuals from an
AR(1) model applied to the monthly data.14
    We obtain daily settlement prices for WTI crude oil futures with various maturities from
Bloomberg, and compute the percentage changes for the closing prices at the end of each month.
To reduce micro-structure noise associated with futures of specific maturities, we compute three
equal-weighted average returns of futures of different maturities as the key dependent variables
for our studies: one for short-term maturities averaging all 1-month to 12-month futures, one
for longer-term maturities averaging all 13-month to 24-month futures along with the 60-month
future; we also construct a measure that equal-weights returns averaging all 1-month to 24-
month futures as well as the 60-month future.
    We include controls that help capture other determinants of oil prices (see a discussion of
these variables in Alquist et al., 2013): the U.S. inflation rate, U.S. real GDP growth, percentage
change in M1 money supply, percentage change in M2 money supply, Chicago Fed National
Activity Index (CFNAI), Kilian’s (2009) global real activity index, and percentage change in
zero-coupon treasury yields by Liu and Wu (2021).15 We also control for the stock market
  14
     We also run the same regression at the weekly frequency (holding key control variables constant throughout
the month). The results are directionally similar to the monthly regression, but usually not statistically significant.
  15
     The U.S. inflation rate is computed as the percentage change in the U.S. consumer price index (CPI). Both


                                                          28
excess returns and an additional demand factor OECD liquid fuel consumption change from
EIA. The data spans a 12-year period between 2012 and 2023. See Appendix Table 10 for a
detailed overview of the data and its sources. Table 4 shows the results of the regression, with
each column corresponding to a different dependent variable.
                                  Table 4: Oil Futures Price and NYT Index

 XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX                             XXXXXXXX        XXXXXXXX XXXXXXXX
                                                                                Monthly Level
                                                                 Avg 1-12m       Avg 13-60m       Avg 1-60m
                                                                    (1)              (2)             (3)
 Index AR(1) Innovation - Emission Cost                           0.0120∗∗         0.0078∗          0.0111∗∗
                                                                  (0.0059)         (0.0041)         (0.0048)
 Index AR(1) Innovation - Renewable Breakthrough                  -0.0139∗∗        -0.0094∗∗       -0.0122∗∗
                                                                   (0.0056)         (0.0042)        (0.0047)
 Index AR(1) Innovation - Oil Capacity                            -0.0115∗          -0.0058          -0.0071
                                                                  (0.0061)         (0.0041)         (0.0049)
 Controls                                                            Yes              Yes             Yes
 p-value Emission Cost = Renewable Breakthrough                    0.0044           0.0062           0.0013
 p-value Emission Cost = Oil Capacity                               0.017            0.041            0.028
 p-value Renewable Breakthrough = Oil Capacity                       0.79             0.56             0.47
 R2                                                                 0.486            0.450            0.517
 Observations                                                        143              143              143
Note: Columns (1) to (3) report on three equally weighted averages of WTI oil futures returns: Column (1) covers
returns for futures with maturities ranging from 1 to 12 months; Column (2) includes futures with maturities from
13 to 24 months, as well as the 60-month futures returns; and Column (3) uses futures with maturities ranging
from 1 to 24 months, and the 60-month futures returns. The regressions control for several macroeconomic
factors: the U.S. inflation rate, U.S. real GDP growth, percentage changes in M1 and M2 money supplies,
CFNAI, Kilian’s (2009) global real activity index, stock market excess returns, and changes in OECD liquid fuel
consumption. Additionally, the regressions control for the percentage change in treasury yields matched to the
maturity of the oil futures. For instance, for the average oil futures returns across 1 to 12 months, we use 1,
3, 6, and 12-month treasury yields. Similarly, for the average returns of oil futures across 13 to 60 months, 24
and 60-month treasury yields are used. Finally, for average returns of oil futures across 1 to 60 months, we use
1, 3, 6, 12, 24 and 60-month treasury yields. The p-values for testing the difference between the coefficients
of each pair of NYT news indices are also reported. Standard errors are in parentheses and are corrected for
heteroscedasticity. Significance levels: * (p<0.10), ** (p<0.05), *** (p<0.01).


     The results we obtain for the NYT-Renewable Breakthrough News Index align with the
prediction of the model: oil futures price generally decrease in response to news about a possi-
ble renewable energy technology breakthrough, consistent with oil companies deciding to shift
production forward in anticipation of higher future competition from the renewable sector.
     Oil futures prices across all maturities increase on news of higher future emission costs; as
discussed before, this is consistent with the model in the scenario where some incumbents’ assets
will be stranded in the carbon tax scenario. Our model also predicts that oil futures prices should
rise upon news about restrictions in building new capacity. The observed relationship between
oil future prices and innovations in the NYT-Oil Capacity News Index instead is negative though
usually not statistically significantly so.
     Overall, the table shows that, consistent with the predictions of the model, different types
of transition risk can have quite different effects on oil prices. This highlights the importance
of distinguishing different sources of transition risk.
the CFNAI and Kilian’s (2009) global real activity index are constructed to be stationary. Treasury yields are
matched to the maturity of the oil futures; for instance, we control for 1-month treasury yields when analyzing
oil futures with a 1-month maturity.


                                                       29
4    Conclusions
We explore how different climate transition risks can affect the price of energy and the valuation
of energy firms. Our analysis delivers two general insights. First, rather than “transition risks”
being a monolithic concept, different transition risks can result in different impacts on energy
supply and energy prices across time periods. Second, building on the previous insight, we find
that fossil fuel firms are not homogeneous in their response to transition risks, and the effects
of transition risk realizations on firm valuations depend on firms’ level of existing production
capacity. Thus, a full understanding of the impact of transition risks requires differentiating
between different types of transition risks and different types of energy firms.
    Our current model can be extended in several interesting directions. First, the model can
be set into an infinite horizon setting, in order to obtain additional insights and quantitative
estimates of the effects that we have described. Second, we could consider subsidies to the
renewable sector as an additional policy instrument, in line with what we are currently seeing
in the U.S., and also analyze the effects of technological developments in carbon capture and
storage, which would likely help oil and gas firms while hurting renewables. Third, we could
make the transition probability endogenous to the tax policy, which would capture the idea
that as the fossil fuel sector becomes subject to higher taxes, investors in the economy can
reallocate resources to the development of green technologies which would accelerate the tran-
sition (Acemoglu et al., 2012; Acharya et al., 2023). Finally, while we focused in our empirical
work on energy prices and stock prices of energy subsectors, model implications on inventories,
investments and production are also worthy of empirical scrutiny.


References
Acemoglu, Daron, Philippe Aghion, Leonardo Bursztyn, and David Hemous, “The
 Environment and Directed Technical Change,” American Economic Review, 2012, 102 (1),
 131–166.

Acemoglu, Daron, Ufuk Akcigit, Douglas Hanley, and William Kerr, “Transition to
 Clean Technology,” Journal of Political Economy, 2016, 124 (1), 52–104.

Acharya, Viral V., Robert F. Engle, and Olivier Wang, “Strategic Commitments to De-
 carbonize: The Role of Large Firms, Common Ownership, and Governments,” 2023. Working
 Paper.

Adolfsen, Jakob Feveile, Malte Heissel, Ana-Simona Manu, and Francesca Vinci,
 “Burn Now or Never? Climate Change Exposure and Investment of Fossil Fuel Firms,” ECB
 Working Paper Series 2945, European Central Bank 2024.

Aghion, Philippe, Antoine Dechezleprêtre, David Hemous, Ralf Martin, and John
 Van Reenen, “Carbon Taxes, Path Dependency, and Directed Technical Change: Evidence
 from the Auto Industry,” Journal of Political Economy, 2016, 124 (1), 1–51.

Alekseev, Georgij, Stefano Giglio, Quinn Maingi, Julia Selgrad, and Johannes
 Stroebel, “A Quantity-Based Approach to Constructing Climate Risk Hedge Portfolios,”
 2022. Working Paper.


                                               30
Alquist, Ron, Lutz Kilian, and Robert J. Vigfusson, “Forecasting the Price of Oil,” in
 “Handbook of Economic Forecasting,” Vol. 2, Elsevier, 2013, pp. 427–507.

Ardia, David, Keven Bluteau, Kris Boudt, and Koen Inghelbrecht, “Climate change
 concerns and the performance of green vs. brown stocks,” Management Science, 2023, 69
 (12), 7607–7632.

Barnett, Michael, “A Run on Fossil Fuel? Climate Change and Transition Risk,” 2023.
 Working Paper.

Bolton, Patrick and Marcin Kacperczyk, “Do Investors Care About Carbon Risk?,” Jour-
 nal of Financial Economics, 2021, 142 (2), 517–549.

Bua, Giovanna, Daniel Kapp, Federico Ramella, and Lavinia Rognone, “Transition
 versus physical climate risk pricing in European financial markets: A text-based approach,”
 The European Journal of Finance, 2024, pp. 1–35.

Del Negro, Marco, Julian di Giovanni, and Keshav Dogra, “Is the Green Transition
 Inflationary?,” Staff Reports 1053, Federal Reserve Bank of New York 2023.

Engle, Robert F., “Termination Risk and Sustainability,” 2023. Working Paper.

Engle, Robert F., Stefano Giglio, Bryan Kelly, Heebum Lee, and Johannes Stroebel,
 “Hedging Climate Change News,” Review of Financial Studies, 2020, 33 (3), 1184–1216.

Faccini, Renato, Rastin Matin, and George Skiadopoulos, “Dissecting climate risks:
  Are they reflected in stock prices?,” Journal of Banking & Finance, 2023, 155, 106948.

Ferrari, Alessandro and Valerio Nispi Landi, “Will the Green Transition be Inflationary?
  Expectations Matter,” IMF Economic Review, August 2024.

Giglio, Stefano, Bryan Kelly, and Johannes Stroebel, “Climate Finance,” Annual Review
 of Financial Economics, 2021, 13, 15–36.

Golosov, Mikhail, John Hassler, Per Krusell, and Aleh Tsyvinski, “Optimal Taxes on
 Fossil Fuel in General Equilibrium,” Econometrica, 2014, 82 (1), 41–88.

Gowrisankaran, Gautam, Stanley S Reynolds, and Mario Samano, “Intermittency and
 the value of renewable energy,” Journal of Political Economy, 2016, 124 (4), 1187–1234.

Heyes, Anthony, Andrew Leach, and Charles F Mason, “The economics of Canadian
 oil sands,” Review of Environmental Economics and Policy, 2018.

Hong, Harrison, Frank Weikai Li, and Jiangmin Xu, “Climate Risks and Market Effi-
 ciency,” Journal of Econometrics, 2019, 208 (1), 265–281.

Känzig, Diego R., “The Unequal Economic Consequences of Carbon Pricing,” 2023. Working
 Paper.

Kellogg, Ryan, “The End of Oil,” Working Paper 33207, National Bureau of Economic Re-
 search November 2024.


                                            31
Kilian, Lutz, “Not All Oil Price Shocks Are Alike: Disentangling Demand and Supply Shocks
 in the Crude Oil Market,” American Economic Review, 2009, 99 (3), 1053–1069.

Kimani, Alex, “Oil Majors Pursue Projects with $30 per Barrel Breakeven,” OilPrice.com,
 2024.

Konradt, Maximilian and Beatrice Weder di Mauro, “Carbon Taxation and Greenfla-
 tion: Evidence from Europe and Canada,” 2022. Working Paper.

Lee, Jinjoo, “Is Trump Really Better Than Harris for Oil and Gas Investors,” The Wall Street
  Journal, 2024.

Lee, Jinjoo, “Why Big Oil Doesn’t Mind Big Regulation,” The Wall Street Journal, 2024.

Lemoine, Derek and Christian Traeger, “Watch Your Step: Optimal Policy in a Tipping
  Climate,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2014, 6 (1), 137–166.

Liu, Yan and Jing Cynthia Wu, “Reconstructing the Yield Curve,” Journal of Financial
  Economics, 2021, 142 (3), 1395–1425.

Morenne, Benoı̂t and Collin Eaton, “Trump’s Oil and Gas Donors Don’t Really Want to
 ‘Drill, Baby, Drill’,” The Wall Street Journal, 2024.

Pisani-Ferry, Jean, “Climate Policy is Macroeconomic Policy, and the Implications Will Be
  Significant,” Policy Brief 21-20, Peterson Institute for International Economics 2021.

Ritchie, Hannah and Max Roser, “Energy Mix,” https://ourworldindata.org/
 energy-mix 2020.

Rystad Energy, “Rystad Energy: As falling Costs Make New Oil Cheaper to Produce, Climate
 Policies May Fail Unless they Target Demand,” Rogtec Magazine, 2021.

Rystad Energy, “Shale project economics still reign supreme as cost of new oil production
 rises further,” 2024. Accessed: 2025-01-15.

Schnabel, Isabel, “A New Age of Energy Inflation: Climateflation, Fossilflation and Green-
  flation,” Speech at a panel on “Monetary Policy and Climate Change” at The ECB and its
  Watchers XXII Conference 2022.

Sinn, Hans-Werner, “Public Policies Against Global Warming: A Supply Side Approach,”
  International Tax and Public Finance, 2008, 15, 360–394.

van Benthem, Arthur A., Edmund Crooks, Stefano Giglio, Eugenie Schwob, and
  Johannes Stroebel, “The Effect of Climate Risks on the Interactions Between Financial
  Markets and Energy Companies,” Nature Energy, 2022, 7, 820–828.

Williams, James H, Ryan A Jones, Ben Haley, Gabe Kwok, Jeremy Hargreaves,
 Jamil Farbes, and Margaret S Torn, “Carbon-neutral pathways for the United States,”
 AGU advances, 2021, 2 (1), e2020AV000284.




                                            32
Appendix A            Details on Full Model
A.1     Model Setup
A.1.1    Consumers and Demand for Energy

We keep the consumer side of the economy deliberately simple, in order to focus on the sector
supplying energy. We assume that in each period there is a uniformly distributed unit mass of
competitive consumers of energy, indexed by i ∈ [0, 1]. Such consumers include both households
and firms that use energy as an intermediate good in their production. Each consumer i is
endowed in each period with some exogenous wealth W that can be used to purchase energy.
Wealth cannot be stored across periods. In period T, consumers solve the following problem

                                                 (eit )1−γ − 1
                                        max
                                          eit         1−γ

                                         s.t. Pt eit ≤ W,

with γ > 1, where eit denotes consumption of energy, and Pt is the price of energy in the market
supplying to them. It follows immediately that each consumer’s demand for energy in period 0
is

                                                        W
                                                ei0 =
                                                        P0
In period 1, the price of energy faced by each consumer will differ according to whether the BT
or the CT scenario materializes, and, in the latter case, depending on whether the consumer’s
energy demand is electrifiable or not. Hence, for each scenario j ∈ {BT, CT }, we have:

                                                        W
                                            ei1,j =      i
                                                        P1,j
In the Breakthrough Technology scenario there is an integrated market for energy. This implies
that all the consumers face the same price, that is P1,BTi     = P1,BT for each i ∈ [0, 1]. In the
Current Technology scenario, on the other hand, we assume without loss of generality that
all the consumers in the interval [0, q] can electrify their energy demand, while the rest of the
consumers can only purchase energy from the fossil fuel firms. This implies that P1,CTi     = P1,E
                    i
if i ∈ [0, q], and P1,CT = P1,N E otherwise, where P1,E and P1,N E denote the price of energy in
the electrifiable and non-electrifiable markets of the CT scenario respectively.
     Integrating across consumers, aggregate demands for energy in each period and scenarios
are thus respectively given by

                                                        W
                                                D0 =       ,
                                                        P0
                           W                       W                                 W
                D1,BT =           ,   D1,E = q         ,         D1,N E = (1 − q)            .
                          P1,BT                   P1,E                              P1,N E

A.1.2    Green Firm

In period 0, the green firm has to choose how much production capacity to install, to be
potentially used in period 1. We assume that installing an amount of production capacity C


                                                   33
                   1 2
has a convex cost 2δ C , where δ > 0, and that this capacity can then be used to produce energy
in period 1 at zero marginal cost, capturing the fact that wind, solar, hydro and tidal energy
production does not require to purchase fuels operate. Hence, in period 1, the green firm will
always choose to activate its full production capacity. The renewable firm maximizes expected
profits, taking as given the price of energy (P1,BT , P1,E ) in the respective markets at date 1
where it is able to sell. The firm’s problem is therefore:
                                                                       
                                  1 2
                          max − C + C pBT P1,BT + (1 − pBT )P1,E                            (15)
                           C≥0    2δ

which implies that the optimal installed capacity by the renewable firm at time 0 is
                                                             
                            C = δ pBT P1,BT + (1 − pBT )P1,E .


A.1.3    Fossil Fuel Firm: Incumbent

At time 0, we assume that an incumbent fossil fuel producer has an existing capacity of f¯0I ,
which can be used immediately to produce energy, or saved for the next period as inventory.
Producing an amount of energy f0I has a cost of 2κ1 1 (f0I )2 , κ1 > 0. In period 1, if the BT scenario
realizes, the firm will always be facing competition of the renewable producer. If the CT scenario
realizes, the fossil fuel producer will be the only supplier of energy for a fraction (1 − q) of total
demand, where it might thus earn high profits. The firm maximizes expected profits by choosing
its time- and state-contingent supplies (f0I , f1,BT , f1,E , f1,N E ), taking as given the price of energy
at time 0, P0 , and in all the possible states in period 1, (P1,BT , P1,E , P1,N E ). We also assume
that in case of a technological breakthrough in period 1, a social planner imposes a carbon tax
on fossil fuel firms at a rate τ1,BT ≥ 0 on their sales P1,BT f1,BT . As we argued in section 1.7,
a social planner would chooses a lower carbon tax in the CT scenario than in the BT scenario:
τ1,CT < τ1,BT . For simplicity, we assume therefore that τ1,CT = 0.
     The fossil fuel incumbent producer (superscript I) therefore solves in period 0:

                                                      1
                                    max f0I P0 −        (f I )2 + E[VfI ]                             (16)
                                         f0I         2κ1 0

subject to 0 ≤ f0I ≤ f¯0I . The date-1 continuation value VfI is equal to VfI,BT with probability
pBT , and VfI,CT with probability (1 − pBT ). These continuation values are given by

                                                                         1
                        VfI,BT = max (1 − τ1,BT )P1,BT f1,BT
                                                        I
                                                             −             (f I )2 ,                  (17)
                                    I
                                   f1,BT                                2κ1 1,BT

                I
subject to 0 ≤ f1,BT ≤ f¯0I − f0I , and

                                                                         1
                 VfI,CT =     max               I
                                          P1,E f1,E           I
                                                    + P1,N E f1,N E −      (f I + f1,N
                                                                                   I     2
                                                                                       E) ,           (18)
                             I ,f I
                            f1,E 1,N E
                                                                        2κ1 1,E

                I + fI
subject to 0 ≤ f1,E          ¯I    I
                     1,N E ≤ f0 − f0 .




                                                       34
A.1.4    Fossil Fuel Firm: Entrant

In order to cleanly model fossil fuel firms with low existing reserves, we also assume that
there is a representative entrant firm that has to choose how much new production capacity to
install to be potentially produced in period 1. Installing an amount of capacity f¯1E has a cost
    1        ¯E 2
2(1−τ̄0 )κ2 (f1 ) , κ2 > 0, and where τ̄0 ≥ 0 represents a tax that might be imposed by the social
planner on the construction of new fossil fuel production capacity.The fossil fuel entrant firm
(superscript E) therefore chooses its capacity investment in period 0 by solving:

                                                   1
                                max −                      (f¯E )2 + E[VfE ]                  (19)
                                  f¯1E        2(1 − τ̄0 )κ2 1

subject to f¯1E ≥ 0. As for the incumbent fossil fuel firm, the date-1 continuation value for the
entrant VfE is equal to VfE,BT with probability pBT , given by

                                                                          1
                     VfE,BT = max (1 − τ1,BT )P1,BT f1,BT
                                                     E
                                                          −                 (f E )2 ,         (20)
                                  E
                                 f1,BT                                   2κ1 1,BT

                E
subject to 0 ≤ f1,BT ≤ f¯1E , and to VfE,CT otherwise, given by

                                                                         1
               VfE,CT =     max                E
                                         P1,E f1,E           E
                                                   + P1,N E f1,N E −       (f E + f1,N
                                                                                   E     2
                                                                                       E) ,   (21)
                           E ,f E
                          f1,E 1,N E
                                                                        2κ1 1,E

                E + fE
subject to 0 ≤ f1,E          ¯E
                     1,N E ≤ f1 .


A.1.5    Market Clearing and Equilibrium

Given the production choices by the firms in the economy, supplies of energy in each period are
given by
                                           S0 = f0I ,
                                                      I       E
                                         S1,BT = C + f1,BT + f1,BT ,
                                                   I      E
                                       S1,E = C + f1,E + f1,E , and
                                                    I        E
                                          S1,N E = f1,N E + f1,N E .

By imposing market clearing, we obtain the following equilibrium conditions

                                                     W
                                                        = f0I ,                               (22)
                                                     P0

                                          W             I       E
                                                 = C + f1,BT + f1,BT ,                        (23)
                                         P1,BT
                                          W          I      E
                                   q          = C + f1,E + f1,E , and                         (24)
                                         P1,E
                                                 W         I        E
                                  (1 − q)               = f1,N E + f1,N E .                   (25)
                                               P1,N E
The previous system can be solved to find an expression for the equilibrium prices and the
production choices of the firms as a function of the fundamentals of the economy. Assuming for


                                                        35
now that the tax rates are kept fixed, we can provide the following definition of equilibrium in
our model.
Definition. An equilibrium of the two-period model consists of renewable producer installed
capacity, C, fossil fuel incumbent producer quantities, (f0I , f1,BT
                                                                   I        I , fI
                                                                         , f1,E  1,N E ), fossil fuel entrant
                        ¯E   E      E      E
producer quantities, (f1 , f1,BT , f1,E , f1,N E ), and prices, (P0 , P1,BT , P1,E , P1,N E ), such that
      • Given prices, the renewable capacity C solves the renewable producer problem (1).

      • Given prices, the fossil fuel producers’ quantities solve the fossil fuel producer problems.

      • Quantities and prices satisfy the market clearing conditions.
To focus on the more interesting implications of our analysis, we assume that the initial fossil
fuel reserves f¯0I are not so high that the producer is always unconstrained in all periods. We
also assume that in period 1 the incumbent fossil fuel firm is less constrained than the entrant
firm.

A.2      Solution to the Incumbent Fossil Fuel Producer’s Problem
Let f¯1I = f¯0I − f0I . We can solve the problem of the fossil fuel producer starting from period 1. If the
production constraint is binding, then the continuation value in the BT scenario is equal to

                                                                   1 ¯I 2
                                VfI,BT = (1 − τ1,BT )P1,BT f¯1I −    (f ) .
                                                                  2κ1 1

If instead the constraint is not binding, then the optimal production is given by

                                           I
                                          f1,BT = κ1 (1 − τ1,BT )P1,BT ,

and, consequently,
                                                1
                                     VfI,BT =     κ1 (1 − τ1,BT )2 (P1,BT )2 .
                                                2
Let P1,∗ = max{P1,E , P1,N E }. Note that both fossil fuel firms will want to use its entire production
capacity in the market where the price for energy is higher. If the production constraint in the CT
scenario is binding, we thus have

                                                                   1 ¯I 2
                                VfI,CT = (1 − τ1,CT )P1,CT f¯1I −    (f ) ,
                                                                  2κ1 1

and                                         
                                              ¯I
                                            f1         if P1,E > P1,N E
                                            
                                            
                                       I
                                      f1,E = 12 f¯1I    if P1,E = P1,N E
                                            
                                            
                                            0          if P1,E < P1,N E
                                               
                                                 ¯I
                                               f1       if P1,E < P1,N E
                                               
                                               
                                       I         1 ¯I
                                      f1,N E =   2 f1    if P1,E = P1,N E
                                               
                                               
                                               0        if P1,E > P1,N E
where we assumed that in case prices are equal across states, then supply is split equally. Suppose instead
that the constraint in the CT scenario is not binding. Then, we have
                                     
                                     κ1 (1 − τ1,CT )P1,N E      if P1,E < P1,N E
                                     
                                     
                             I        1
                            f1,E =      κ (1 − τ1,CT )P1,N E     if P1,E = P1,N E
                                     2 1
                                     
                                     0                          if P1,E > P1,N E

                                                        36
which gives
                                                         1
                                         VfI,CT =          κ1 (1 − τ1,CT )2 (P1,∗ )2 .
                                                         2
We have therefore different cases to consider.

   1. Production constraint in period 1 never binding: this gives

                                                                  1
                                          max         f0I P0 −      (f I )2
                                        0≤f0I ≤f¯0I              2κ1 0
                                                            κ1
                                                      + pBT    (1 − τ1,BT )2 (P1,BT )2
                                                             2
                                                                  κ1
                                                      + (1 − pBT ) (1 − τ1,CT )2 (P1,∗ )2
                                                                   2
      which gives the following interior solution

                                                              f0I = κ1 P0 .

   2. Production constraint in period 1 binding in the BT scenario only: this gives

                                                   1
                            max        f0I P0 −      (f I )2
                         0≤f0I ≤f¯0I              2κ1 0
                                                                                               
                                                                                1 ¯I
                                       + pBT (1 − τ1,BT )P1,BT (f¯0I − f0I ) −     (f0 − f0I )2
                                                                               2κ1
                                                   κ1            2        2
                                       + (1 − pBT ) (1 − τ1,CT ) (P1,∗ )
                                                   2
      which gives the following interior solution
                                        κ1         pBT κ1                       pBT ¯I
                          f0I =              P0 −         (1 − τ1,BT )P1,BT +        f .
                                     1 + pBT      1 + pBT                     1 + pBT 0

   3. Production constraint in period 1 binding in the CT scenario only: this gives

                                                 1
                         max         f0I P0 −      (f I )2
                       0≤f0I ≤f¯0I              2κ1 0
                                             κ1
                                     + pBT      (1 − τ1,BT )2 (P1,BT )2
                                             2                                                           
                                                                                          1 ¯I
                                     + (1 − pBT ) (1 − τ1,CT )P1,∗ (f¯0I − f0I ) −          (f − f0I )2
                                                                                         2κ1 0

      which gives the following interior solution

                                    κ1        (1 − pBT )κ1                    1 − pBT ¯I
                         f0I =           P0 −              (1 − τ1,CT )P1,∗ +         f .
                                 2 − pBT        2 − pBT                       2 − pBT 0

   4. Production constraint in period 1 always binding: this gives

                                                 1
                         max         f0I P0 −      (f I )2
                       0≤f0I ≤f¯0I              2κ1 0
                                                                                         
                                                               ¯I      I      1 ¯I    I 2
                                     + pBT (1 − τ1,BT )P1,BT (f0 − f0 ) −       (f − f0 )
                                                                            2κ1 0
                                                                                              
                                                                    ¯I    I      1 ¯I      I 2
                                     + (1 − pBT ) (1 − τ1,CT )P1,∗ (f0 − f0 ) −    (f − f0 )
                                                                                2κ1 0

      which gives the following interior solution
                                                                                            
                   I   1 ¯I κ1         κ1
                 f 0 = f 0 + P0 −          pBT (1 − τ1,BT )P1,BT + (1 − pBT )(1 − τ1,CT )P1,∗ .
                       2      2        2

                                                                 37
A.3     Solution to the Entrant Fossil Fuel Producer’s Problem
In period 1, the problem of the entrant producer is analogous to the one of the incumbent producer,
with the only difference being f¯1 = f¯1E . We have therefore different cases to consider in period 0.

   1. Production constraint binding in the BT scenario only: this gives

                                                     1
                                    max −                   (f¯E )2
                                   f¯1E ≥0     2(1 − τ̄0 )κ2 1
                                                                                  
                                                                     ¯E      1 ¯E
                                             + pBT (1 − τ1,BT )P1,BT f1 −        f
                                                                           2κ1 1
                                                           κ1
                                             + (1 − pBT ) (1 − τ1,CT )2 (P1,,∗ )2
                                                           2
      which gives the following interior solution

                                                pBT (1 − τ̄0 )κ1 κ2
                                     f¯1E =                          (1 − τ1BT )P1,BT .
                                               κ1 + pBT (1 − τ̄0 )κ2

   2. Production constraint binding in the CT scenario only: this gives

                                                1
                               max −                    (f¯E )2
                               f¯1E ≥0     2(1 − τ̄0 )κ2 1
                                               κ1
                                         + pBT (1 − τ1,BT )2 (P1,BT )2
                                                2                                           
                                                                               1 ¯E 2
                                         + (1 − pBT ) (1 − τ1,CT )P1,∗ f¯1E −    (f )
                                                                              2κ1 1

      which gives the following interior solution

                                              (1 − pBT )(1 − τ̄0 )κ1 κ2
                                  f¯1E =                                 (1 − τ1CT )P1,∗ .
                                             κ1 + (1 − pBT )(1 − τ̄0 )κ2

   3. Production constraint always binding: this gives

                                                 1
                               max −                    (f¯E )2
                               f¯1E ≥0     2(1 − τ̄0 )κ2 1
                                                                                    
                                                                            1 ¯E 2
                                         + pBT (1 − τ1,BT )P1,BT f¯1E −        (f1 )
                                                                           2κ1
                                                                                        
                                                                                1 ¯E 2
                                         + (1 − pBT ) (1 − τ1,CT )P1,∗ f¯1E −      (f1 )
                                                                               2κ1

      which gives the following interior solution
                                                                                             
                  ¯E      (1 − τ̄0 )κ1 κ2
                  f1 =                      pBT (1 − τ1,BT )P1,BT + (1 − pBT )(1 − τ1,CT )P1,∗ .
                         κ1 + (1 − τ̄0 )κ2

    Note that since in equilibrium fossil fuel firms will only supply in the CT market with the highest
price, it has to be that P1,N E ≥ P1,E . Indeed, if this was not the case, then fossil fuel supply in the NE
market would be zero. But then, according to the market clearing condition (25), the price in the NE
market would go to infinity, which is a contradiction. Excluding the knife-edge case where energy prices
are equal in the two markets, it then follows that fossil fuel firms will only supply in the Non-Electrifiable
market.




                                                           38
Appendix B              Proofs
Proof of Proposition 1 and 2
We take into account also the carbon tax implemented in period 1. If the incumbent producer is
unconstrained in period 1, we have f1I = κ1 P1 . Suppose instead that the production constraint in period
1 for the incumbent firm is binding. Optimal production choices for the incumbent are therefore given
by
                                                                     f¯I
                                                               
                                          κ1
                                      I
                                    f0 =        P0 − (1 − τ1 )P1 + 0                                 (26)
                                           2                          2
                                          f¯0I
                                                                      
                                      I           κ1
                                    f1 =       −      P0 − (1 − τ1 )P1                               (27)
                                           2      2
For the entrant firm, it is always optimal to exhaust its production capacity fully in period 1. Optimal
installed capacity in period 0 is therefore

                                                (1 − τ̄0 )κ1 κ2
                                      f¯1E =                     (1 − τ1 )P1                           (28)
                                               κ1 + (1 − τ̄0 )κ2

Substituting optimal quantities into market clearing conditions, we have

                                                                 f¯I
                                                              
                                      W    κ1
                                         =     P0 − (1 − τ1 )P1 + 0                                    (29)
                                      P0   2                      2

                          f¯I
                                                  
                      W        κ1                      (1 − τ̄0 )κ1 κ2
                         = 0 −     P0 − (1 − τ1 )P1 +                   (1 − τ1 )P1                    (30)
                      P1   2   2                      κ1 + (1 − τ̄0 )κ2
     Let us consider how equilibrium outcomes change with the derivative with respect to the tax on new
drilling. Optimal quantities change according to

                                       df0I
                                                                     
                                              κ1 dP0             dP1
                                            =        − (1 − τ1 )                                       (31)
                                       dτ̄0   2 dτ̄0             dτ̄0

                                                     df1I   df I
                                                          =− 0                                         (32)
                                                     dτ̄0   dτ̄0
                   df¯1E    (1 − τ̄0 )κ1 κ2            dP1           κ21 κ2
                         =                   (1 − τ1 )      −                       (1 − τ1 )P1        (33)
                   dτ̄0    κ1 + (1 − τ̄0 )κ2           dτ̄0   [κ1 + (1 − τ̄0 )κ2 ]2
and from market clearing conditions we have that

                                                     W dP0    df I
                                                 −    2      = 0                                       (34)
                                                     P0 dτ̄0  dτ̄0

                                               W dP1        df0I   df¯1E
                                          −             = −      +                                     (35)
                                               P12 dτ̄0     dτ̄0   dτ̄0
                                                                                         df I
We proceed by contradiction. Suppose that dP
                                          dτ̄0 < 0. Then (34) implies that dτ̄0 > 0. From (31) we
                                             0                               0

                                                          df¯E                                  df¯E
then get dP
          dτ̄0 < 0 which implies, using (33), that dτ̄0 < 0, and using (35) that dτ̄0 > 0, which is a
             1                                          1                               1


contradiction. Therefore, it must be that dP               dP0
                                           dτ̄0 ≥ 0. But dτ̄0 = 0 implies, following the same steps, that
                                              0


P1 = 0, which cannot be an equilibrium. Therefore, it must be dP   dτ̄0 > 0.
                                                                      0


    We now prove the result on firms’ profits and drilling restrictions. Starting from the incumbent, after
substituting optimal quantities into the expressions for the profits, we find

                                     dΠE     1 − τ1 df¯1E
                                                                        
                                                                    dP1
                                           =              P1 + f¯1E                                    (36)
                                      dτ̄0     2     dτ̄0           dτ̄0




                                                         39
Using (35), we have
                                               W dP1      df¯1E
                                                        +       <0                                      (37)
                                               P12 dτ̄0   dτ̄0
                                                         f¯E                                        E
but the market clearing condition implies that PW2 > P11 , from which it follows immediately that dΠ
                                                                                                  dτ̄0 < 0.
                                                 1
    Finally, after some algebra we obtain

           dΠI
                                                                                       
                  dP0 κ1                      1 ¯I   1 − τ1 dP1 ¯I
                =        (P0 − (1 − τ1 )P1 ) + f0 +             f − κ1 (P0 − (1 − τ1 )P1 )              (38)
           dτ̄0   dτ̄0 2                      2        2 dτ̄0 0

which is positive as both prices are increasing in the tax rate, and it follows immediately from the
expressions for the equilibrium quantities that both terms in brackets are positive.
    Turning now to the proof of Proposition 2, the derivatives of the optimal quantities with respect to
the carbon tax are given by

                                      df0I
                                                                             
                                             κ1 dP0                 dP1
                                           =            − (1 − τ1 )      + P1                           (39)
                                      dτ1     2 dτ1                 dτ1
                                 df¯1E
                                                                                
                                            (1 − τ̄0 )κ1 κ2             dP1
                                        =                     (1 − τ1 )     − P1                        (40)
                                 dτ1       κ1 + (1 − τ̄0 )κ2            dτ1
while market clearing conditions give
                                                    W dP0   df I
                                                −    2     = 0                                          (41)
                                                    P0 dτ1  dτ1
                                              W dP1       df0I   df¯1E
                                          −           = −      +                                        (42)
                                              P12 dτ1     dτ1    dτ1
                                                                                           df I
Suppose again by contradiction that dP
                                    dτ1 > 0, which immediately implies using (41) that dτ1 < 0. Then,
                                       0                                                 0

                                                                                            df¯E
(39) gives P1 − (1 − τ1 ) dP                                  dP1
                          dτ1 < 0, which immediately implies dτ1 > 0 and, using (40), dτ1 > 0. But
                            1                                                            1


then, (42) gives dP                                                        dP0
                  dτ1 < 0, which is a contradiction. Therefore, it must be dτ1 ≤ 0. Finally, assuming
                     1

dP0                                             dP1         dP1                            dP0
 dτ1 = 0 and following the previous steps gives dτ1 > 0 and dτ1 = 0. Therefore, it must be dτ1 < 0. It
immediately follows that both supply from the incumbent in period 1 and investment in new capacity
by the entrant are decreasing in τ1 .
     Entrant’s profits now change according to

                          dΠE    1 df¯1E
                                                                           
                             1                         ¯E           dP1
                               =         (1 − τ1 )P1 + f1 (1 − τ1 )     − P1                            (43)
                           dτ1   2 dτ1                              dτ1
                          df¯E
Which is negative, given dτ11 < 0 and (40). Finally, profits for the incumbent change according to

         dΠI1    1 df I                                      df I 1 ¯I
                                                                                           
                                                 dP1
              = − f0I 0 + (f¯0 − f0I ) (1 − τ1 )     − P1 + 2 0     (f0 − f0I ) − (1 − τ1 )P1           (44)
         dτ1     2 dτ1                           dτ1         dτ1 κ1

                                                                                 df I
The first term on the RHS of the previous expression is negative, since dτ01 > 0. The second and third
term are also negative, using (40) and f0I < f¯0I ), and using the optimality condition for f0I . It then
             dΠI
follows that dτ11 < 0.


Proof of Proposition 3
Let P1,T and P1,N T denote the price of energy in the two possible states in period 1. We first describe
the solutions for the two producers’ problems and then prove our proposition.
    Consider the incumbent fossil fuel firm first. Now it has to choose production quantities in each




                                                        40
period and state, (f0I , f1,T
                          I      I
                              , f1,N T ), in order to solve

                                                                   1
                                           max         f0I P0 −      (f I )2 + E[V1I ]                (45)
                                         0≤f0I ≤f¯0I              2κ1 0

where now the date-1 continuation value V1I is equal to V1,T  I                             I
                                                                with probability pT , and V1,N T with
probability (1 − pT ). These continuation values are given by

                                I                                         I        1
                              V1,T =         max           (1 − τ1 )P1,T f1,T −      (f I )2 ,        (46)
                                           I ≤f¯I −f I
                                        0≤f1,T  0   0
                                                                                  2κ1 1,T

and
                               I                                      I           1
                             V1,N T =           max           P1,N T f1,N T −       (f I   )2 ,       (47)
                                            I
                                         0≤f1,N    ¯I   I
                                                T ≤f0 −f0
                                                                                 2κ1 1,N T
We have therefore two cases to consider. If the production constraint in period 1 is binding in both
states, then we have
                             f¯0I
                                                                               
                        I           κ1
                       f0 =       +     P0 − pT (1 − τ1 )P1,T − (1 − pT )P1,N T                 (48)
                              2     2
                                                                                     I
Suppose instead that the production constraint is only binding in state NT, so that f1,T = (1 −
              ¯I    I
τ1 )κ1 P1,T < f0 − f0 . In this case, we have
                                                                                
                                        1 − pT ¯I     κ1
                                f0I =          f0 +         P0 − (1 − pT )P1,N T                      (49)
                                        2 − pT      2 − pT

Note that since demand for energy is the same in both states, in equilibrium we always have (1−τ1 )P1,T ≤
P1,N T , so that the production constraint can never be binding in the T state only.
     The entrant firm now has to choose production capacity and quantities in each state, namely
  ¯E   E
(f1 , f1,T    E
           , f1,N T ). Proceeding in the same way, if the production constraint in period 1 for the entrant
firm is binding in both states, then we have
                                                                                        
                                    (1 − τ̄0 )κ1 κ2
                            f¯1E =                    pT (1 − τ1 )P1,T + (1 − pT )P1,N T               (50)
                                   κ1 + (1 − τ̄0 )κ2

If instead the production constraint is binding in state NT only, then we have

                                                (1 − τ̄0 )κ1 κ2
                                  f¯1E =                              (1 − pT )P1,N T                 (51)
                                           κ1 + (1 − pT )(1 − τ̄0 )κ2

      Finally, market clearing conditions are now given by

                                                            W
                                                               = f0I                                  (52)
                                                            P0

                                                        W      I      E
                                                            = f1,T + f1,T                             (53)
                                                       P1,T
                                                  W        I        E
                                                        = f1,N T + f1,N T                             (54)
                                                 P1,N T
     We now turn to the proof of the proposition. If the tax rate is low enough, then production capacity
is binding in both states for both producers. Therefore, we have

                      df0I
                                                                                      
                             κ1 dP0                dP1,T                       dP1,N T
                           =        − pT (1 − τ1 )       + pT P1,T − (1 − pT )                        (55)
                      dτ1    2 dτ1                  dτ1                          dτ1

                   df¯1E
                                                                                              
                            (1 − τ̄0 )κ1 κ2                dP1,T                       dP1,N T
                         =                    pT (1 − τ1 )       − pT P1,T + (1 − pT )                (56)
                   dτ1     κ1 + (1 − τ̄0 )κ2                dτ1                          dτ1


                                                              41
and
                                                        W dP0   df I
                                                    −    2     = 0                                                          (57)
                                                        P0 dτ1  dτ1
                                             W dP1,T   df I df¯E
                                       −     2       =− 0 + 1                                                               (58)
                                            P1,T dτ1   dτ1  dτ1

                                            W     dP1,N T     df0I   df¯1E
                                     −      2             = −      +                                                        (59)
                                           P1,N T   dτ1       dτ1    dτ1
                                                                                  df I
Suppose by contradiction that dP
                              dτ1 > 0. Then, using (57), we have dτ1 < 0. It follows from (55) that
                                 0                                 0




                                           dP1,T                       dP1,N T
                           −pT (1 − τ1 )         + pT P1,T − (1 − pT )         <0                                           (60)
                                            dτ1                          dτ1

                                             df¯E                                                                   dP1,T
which in turn implies, using (56), that dτ11 > 0. But then it follows from (58) and (59) that                        dτ1    <0
      dP1,N T                                                               dP0
and     dτ1  < 0, which contradicts (60). Therefore, it must be      ≤ 0. Following the same steps, we
                                                                            dτ1
                       dP0
find immediately that dτ1 = 0 implies that P1,T = 0, which cannot be an equilibrium. Therefore, it
must be dPdτ1 > 0.
            0


    Suppose now that the tax rate increases so that the production constraint for the incumbent fossil
fuel firm becomes not binding in the T state. We assume that the initial production capacity of the
incumbent is large enough so that it is less constrained than the entrant firm. We now have

                                  df0I
                                                                        
                                           κ1    dP0             dP1,N T
                                       =             − (1 − pT )                                                            (61)
                                  dτ1    2 − pT dτ1                dτ1
                                      I
                                    df1,T
                                                                     
                                                         dP1,T
                                          = κ1 (1 − τ1 )       − P1,T                                                       (62)
                                     dτ1                  dτ1
and using market clearing in the T state
                                                         I
                                             W dP1,T   df1,T   df¯1E
                                       −     2       =       +                                                              (63)
                                            P1,T dτ1    dτ1    dτ1

                                                          df I                                            dP1,N T
Suppose now that dP
                 dτ1 < 0. Using (57), we have dτ1 > 0 which implies, using (61), that
                    0                           0
                                                                                                            dτ1     < 0. But
                                df¯E                                   dP
then, using (59), we have that dτ11 > 0 which implies, using (56), that dτ1,T
                                                                           1
                                                                                                > 0. From (63) we then get
  I
df1,T
 dτ1  < 0 which  implies, using (62), that

                                                         dP1,T
                                            (1 − τ1 )          − P1,T < 0                                                   (64)
                                                          dτ1

                                    df¯E
But this, using (56), implies that dτ11 < 0, which is a contradiction. Therefore, we must have dP
                                                                                               dτ1 ≥ 0.
                                                                                                 0

                                                                                         df I                       df I
Following the same steps, we can see immediately that dP                  1,T                      1,T
                                                        dτ1 = 0 implies dτ1 < 0 from (63) and dτ1 = 0
                                                           0

                                                             dP0
from (62), which is a contradiction. Therefore, it must be dτ1 > 0.
    Note that as the tax rate increases even further, then the production constraint becomes binding in
state NT only for the entrant firm as well, which implies that further changes in the tax rate don’t affect
the decisions of any of the two firms. Therefore, as τ1 → 1 we get dP
                                                                    dτ1 = 0.
                                                                       0




Proof of Proposition 4
Optimal quantities are given by
                                                                                         
                               1 − pT ¯I    κ1
                         f0I =        f +                   P0 − (1 − pT )(1 − τ1 )P1,N T                                   (65)
                               2 − pT 0   2 − pT

                                                             42
                                          I
                                        f1,T  = (1 − τ1 − ∆)κ1 P1,T                                    (66)
                                                                                         
                  ¯E    (1 − τ̄0 )κ1 κ2
                  f1 =                     pT (1 − τ1 − ∆)P1,T + (1 − pT )(1 − τ1 )P1,N T              (67)
                       κ1 + (1 − τ̄0 )κ2
Taking the derivatives with respect to ∆, we get

                               df0I
                                                                                
                                          κ1    dP0                      dP1,N T
                                    =               − (1 − pT )(1 − τ1 )                               (68)
                               d∆      2 − pT d∆                           d∆
                                      I
                                    df1,T
                                                                           
                                                             dP1,T
                                           = κ1 (1 − τ1 − ∆)        − P1,T                             (69)
                                     d∆                        d∆
           df¯1E
                                                                                                  
                    (1 − τ̄0 )κ1 κ2                   dP1,T                                dP1,N T
                 =                    pT (1 − τ1 − ∆)       − pT P1,T + (1 − pT )(1 − τ1 )             (70)
           dτ1     κ1 + (1 − τ̄0 )κ2                   d∆                                    d∆
Note that these expressions are analogous to those in the second half of the proof of Proposition B, with
the tax rate in the BT state being now τ1 + ∆, and multiplying the derivative of the NT price by (1 − τ1 ).
Therefore, we can follow the same steps to show that dPd∆ > 0.
                                                         0




Proof of Proposition 5
Optimal quantities of the two fossil fuel producers are the same as in the previous section, with the two
states now being T = BT and N T = CT . We allow for a carbon tax in the BT state, but set it equal
to zero for now. Market clearing conditions in the two states in period 1 are now given by

                                                         W
                                                            = f0I                                      (71)
                                                         P0
                                            W           I       E
                                                 = C + f1,BT + f1,BT                                   (72)
                                           P1,BT
                                                W       I       E
                                                     = f1,CT + f1,CT                                   (73)
                                               P1,CT
   Consider first the case where the production capacity is binding in both states for both fossil fuel
producers. Therefore, we have

           df0I
                                                                                      
                  κ1 dP0                            dP1,BT                dP1,CT
                =        − (1 − τ1,BT ) P1,BT + pBT          − (1 − pBT )        + P1,CT               (74)
          dpBT    2 dpBT                             dpBT                  dpBT

      df¯1E
                                                                                            
               (1 − τ̄0 )κ1 κ2                            dP1,BT                dP1,CT
            =                    (1 − τ1,BT ) P1,BT + pBT          + (1 − pBT )        − P1,CT         (75)
      dpBT    κ1 + (1 − τ̄0 )κ2                            dpBT                  dpBT
                                                                   
                                       dC                    dP1,BT
                                             = δ P1,BT + pBT                                           (76)
                                      dpBT                    dpBT
and
                                                      W dP0      df0I
                                                  −    2      =                                        (77)
                                                      P0 dpBT   dpBT
                                      W      dP1,BT    dC     df0I   df¯1E
                                 −    2             =      −       +                                   (78)
                                     P1,BT    dpBT    dpBT   dpBT    dpBT

                                           W      dP1,CT    df I df¯1E
                                      −    2             =− 0 +                                        (79)
                                          P1,CT    dpBT    dpBT  dpBT
                                                                   dP0
As usual, we prove the proposition by contradiction. Suppose that dp BT
                                                                        > 0. Using (77), this implies




                                                           43
        df I
that dpBT
       0
          < 0. It then follows from (74) that
                                                   
                                             dP1,BT                dP1,CT
                   −(1 − τ1,BT ) P1,BT + pBT          − (1 − pBT )        + P1,CT < 0                             (80)
                                              dpBT                  dpBT

                                                           df¯E                                    dP1,CT
which immediately implies, using (75), that dpBT
                                              1
                                                 > 0. Using (79), we then have                      dpBT    < 0, which
implies, using (80), that
                                                  dP1,BT
                                      P1,BT + pBT        >0                                                       (81)
                                                   dpBT
                                                                                   dP
which immediately implies, using (76) and (78), that dpdC   BT
                                                                > 0 and dp1,BTBT
                                                                                  < 0. Now, note that since in
this case fossil fuel firms are supplying the same quantity in both states, using market clearing conditions
                                                                         df0I
we have P1,BT < P1,CT . But then this implies, using (74), that dpBT            > 0, which is a contradiction.
                            dP0                                                                       dP0
Therefore, it must be dp     BT
                                ≤ 0. Following  the same  steps, we get the    same contradiction if dpBT
                                                                                                           = 0,
                        dP0
so that it must be dpBT < 0.
    Consider now the case where the production constraint for the incumbent fossil fuel producer is only
binding in the CT state. We now have
                                                                                                    
   df0            1                                   ¯        κ1     dP0               dP1,CT
        =                  κ1 P0 −(1−pBT )P1,CT − f0 +                        −(1−pBT )         +P1,CT (82)
 dpBT      (2 − pBT )2                                      2 − pBT dpBT                 dpBT
                                                I
                                              df1,BT                  dP1,BT
                                                     = (1 − τ1,BT )κ1                                             (83)
                                               dpBT                    dpBT
and
                                                                  I
                                          W     dP1,BT    dC    df1,BT    dfˆ1
                                  −    2               =      +        +                                          (84)
                                      P1,BT      dpBT    dpBT    dpBT    dpBT
Note that the first term in bracket on the right hand side of equation (82) is negative, using the expression
for the optimal f0 and the fact that f0 < f¯0 . We first show that dpdC BT
                                                                           ≥ 0. Suppose that the opposite
holds, which immediately implies from (76) that

                                                                   dP1,BT
                                                P1,BT + pBT               <0                                      (85)
                                                                    dpBT
                                                                            I
                    dP1,BT                                                df1,BT
and consequently     dpBT    < 0. It then follows from (83) that           dpBT    < 0, and using (84) it follows that
 dfˆ1
dpBT    > 0. Then, from (85) and (75) we get

                                                           dP1,CT
                                              (1 − pBT )          − P1,CT > 0                                     (86)
                                                            dpBT
                    dP1,CT
and consequently     dpBT    > 0. It then follows from (79) that dpdfBT
                                                                      0                         dP0
                                                                        > 0 and from (77) that dpBT
                                                                                                    < 0.
                                                 dP
But then, (82) implies that −(1 − pBT ) dp1,CT
                                           BT
                                               + P1,CT > 0, which contradicts (86). Therefore, it must
    dC
be dpBT ≥ 0, which immediately implies that

                                                                   dP1,BT
                                                P1,BT + pBT               ≥0                                      (87)
                                                                    dpBT
                                      ˆ
We now show that it must be dpdfBT
                                 1
                                   ≤ 0. Suppose that the opposite holds. Then, from (83) and (84), it
                dP1,BT
must be that     dpBT    < 0. It then follows, from (75) and (87), and noting that (1 − τ1 )P1,BT < P1,CT ,
                                          dP1,CT
that (86) holds, and consequently          dpBT    > 0. But from (79), it must be dpdfBT
                                                                                       0
                                                                                         > 0, which immediately
                           dP0                                                             dP
implies, using (77), that dpBT
                               < 0. But then (82) implies that −(1 − pBT ) dp1,CT
                                                                              BT
                                                                                  + P1,CT > 0, which




                                                                  44
                                                   ˆ
contradicts (86). Therefore, it must be dpdfBT
                                             1
                                               ≤ 0 , which immediately implies, using (75) and (87), that

                                                          dP1,CT
                                           (1 − pBT )            − P1,CT ≤ 0                                  (88)
                                                           dpBT

                   dP                                                            ˆ
Suppose now that dp1,CT
                    BT
                        < 0. Then it follows immediately from dpdfBT
                                                                   1
                                                                     ≤ 0, (79) and (77) that dpdfBT
                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                    <0
     dP0                                                                    I
and dpBT > 0. But note that, using (82) and the expression for the optimal f0 , we have
                                                                
             df0      κ1    dP0      1                                 (1 − pBT ) dP1,CT
                 −              =          κ1 P1,CT − (f¯0 − f0 ) − κ1                                        (89)
            dpBT   2 − pBT dpBT   2 − pBT                               2 − pBT dpBT

The left-hand side of (89) is negative. But κ1 P1,CT > f¯0 − f0 , since the production constraint in the CT
state is binding. Therefore, the right-hand side of (89) is positive, which is a contradiction. It follows
                 dP
that it must be dp1,CT
                    BT
                        ≥ 0.
                                                                              dP0
    These conditions do not allow to pin down with certainty the sign of dp    BT
                                                                                  . In particular, we can see
from (89) that the first term is positive, while the second is negative. However, as pBT → 1, the second
term goes to zero and only the positive term remains, which gives dpdfBT  0
                                                                             > 0 and dpdP0
                                                                                        BT
                                                                                            < 0.
    We show how the various firm’s profits move with pBT in the proof of Proposition 7 using the more
general model.



Proof of Proposition 6
We consider the planner’s problem to set the optimal tax in each state, taking as given the production
capacities of each producer. Let us consider the CT state first. Considering interior solutions for both
fossil fuel producers, optimal quantities are given by

                                         I       E
                                        f1,CT = f1,CT = (1 − τ1,CT )κ1 P1,CT                                  (90)

Plugging these quantities into the market clearing condition (73) we obtain the following expression for
the equilibrium price                           s
                                                         W
                                      P1,CT =                                                       (91)
                                                  2κ1 (1 − τ1,CT )

The first order condition for the planner’s problem is
                                                  −γ
                             2κ1 (1 − τ1,CT )P1,CT     = λ2κ1 (1 − τ1,CT )P1,CT                               (92)

Plugging in the expression for the equilibrium price and rearranging, we obtain

                                                  ∗                      1
                                                 τ1,CT =1−          2                                         (93)
                                                               λ   1+γ   2W κ1
                                        1+γ
                                           2
                                  1                                                      ∗
where we assume that λ >        2W κ1           . Note that it is immediate to see that τ1,CT is increasing in λ.
    Consider now the BT state. optimal fossil fuel quantities are as before

                                         I       E
                                        f1,BT = f1,BT = (1 − τ1,BT )κ1 P1,BT                                  (94)

Using market clearing condition (72), the equilibrium price is now given by
                                                  p
                                                       C 2 + 8κ1 (1 − τ1,BT )W − C
                                   P1,BT =                                                                    (95)
                                                            4κ1 (1 − τ1,BT )



                                                             45
The optimality condition for the planner is now
                                                    −γ
                           C + 2κ1 (1 − τ1,BT )P1,BT     = λ2κ1 (1 − τ1,BT )P1,BT                      (96)

Plugging in the expression for the equilibrium price and rearranging, we can rewrite the previous expres-
sion as                                   1
                                         1−γ                                1
                                                                            1−γ
                                                             1
                    2λκ1 (1 − τ1,BT )W        −                                  =C>0                (97)
                                                  λ(2κ1 W )γ (1 − τ1,BT )γ
which implies after rearranging, since γ > 1, that

                                        ∗                            1          ∗
                                       τ1,BT >1−                2            = τ1,CT                   (98)
                                                           λ   1+γ   2W κ1

    Finally, note that the left-hand side of (97) is decreasing in λ and increasing in τ1,BT . Therefore, as
λ increases, the optimal tax rate that satisfies (97) also has to increase.


B.1     Proof of Proposition 7: Effects of Drilling Restrictions
Suppose that the period-1 production constraint is binding for both fossil fuel producers. Differentiating
both sides of the market clearing conditions with respect to τ̄0 , we obtain

                                                        W dP0       df0I
                                                   −              =                                    (99)
                                                       (P0 )2 τ̄0   dτ̄0

                                           W   dP1,BT   dC     df0I   df¯1E
                                  −                   =      −      +                                 (100)
                                      (P1,BT )2 dτ̄0    dτ̄0   dτ̄0   dτ̄0
                                                     qW dP1,E      dC
                                               −                 =                                    (101)
                                                   (P1,E )2 dτ̄0   dτ̄0
                                          (1 − q)W dP1,N E     df0I   df¯1E
                                      −                    = −      +                                 (102)
                                          (P1,N E )2 dτ̄0      dτ̄0   dτ̄0
For simplicity, let us set τ1,BT = 0, as this has no consequences for the proof. Optimal quantities are
given by                                                                                 
                      ¯ E    (1 − τ̄0 )κ1 κ2
                     f1 =                       pBT (1 − τ1,BT )P1,BT + (1 − pBT )P1,N E          (103)
                            κ1 + (1 − τ̄0 )κ2
                                                                                          
                      I   1 ¯I κ1            κ1
                    f 0 = f 0 + P0 −              pBT (1 − τ1,BT )P1,BT + (1 − pBT )P1,N E        (104)
                          2       2          2
                                                                          
                                     C = δ pBT P1,BT + (1 − pBT )P1,E                             (105)

which implies

                  df¯1E             κ21 κ2
                                                                                               
                        =−                         p BT (1 − τ1,BT )P 1,BT +  (1 − pBT )P 1,N E
                  dτ̄0      [κ1 + (1 − τ̄0 )κ2 ]2
                                                                                                    (106)
                           (1 − τ̄0 )κ1 κ2                      dP1,BT                dP1,N E
                        +                    pBT (1 − τ1,BT )            + (1 − pBT )
                          κ1 + (1 − τ̄0 )κ2                      dτ̄0                   dτ̄0

                    df0I
                                                                                     
                           κ1 dP0    κ1                   dP1,BT              dP1,N E
                         =         −     pBT (1 − τ1,BT )        + (1 − pBT )                         (107)
                    dτ̄0   2 dτ̄0     2                    dτ̄0                 dτ̄0
                                                                        
                                dC            dP1,BT               dP1,E
                                     = δ pBT          + (1 − pBT )                                    (108)
                                dτ̄0            dτ̄0                dτ̄0




                                                               46
We want to show that dP
                     dτ̄0 ≥ 0. We proceed again by contradiction, and suppose that the opposite holds.
                        0

                         df I
From (99), this implies dτ̄00 > 0. It follows from (107) that

                                                dP1,BT              dP1,N E
                                          pBT          + (1 − pBT )         <0                                        (109)
                                                 dτ̄0                 dτ̄0

                                      df¯E                                                     dP1,N E
which implies, using (106) that dτ̄10 < 0. From (102), it then follows that                      dτ̄0    > 0, which implies,
                    dP1,BT                                                    dC
using (109), that     dτ̄0       < 0. From (100), we then have                dτ̄0   > 0, which implies, from (101), that
dP1,E                              dC                                                          dP0
 dτ̄0 < 0. But then, (108) implies dτ̄0 < 0, which is a contradiction. Therefore, we must have dτ̄0 ≥ 0.
           dP0                                                                           dP0
Assuming dτ̄0 = 0 and following the same steps, we find immediately that it must be dτ̄0 > 0. The
proof for the case where the production constraint of the incumbent is binding in the CT state only is
analogous.



B.2     Proof of Proposition 7: Effects of Changes in the Transition Probability
First, note that from the market clearing conditions we must always have P1,E ≤ P1,N E . Indeed, suppose
not. Then, both fossil fuel producers would choose to sell in the electrifiable market only. Therefore,
there would be zero supply of energy in the non-electrifiable market, which would imply P1,N E → ∞,
causing a contradiction.
    Let us focus on the case where the period-1 production constraint is binding for both fossil fuel
producers. Market clearing conditions in this case are therefore

                                                                 W
                                                                    = f0I                                             (110)
                                                                 P0

                                                   W
                                                            = C + f¯0I − f0I + f¯1E                                   (111)
                                                P1,BT
                                                                  W
                                                             q        =C                                              (112)
                                                                 P1,E
                                                            W
                                              (1 − q)             = f¯0I − f0I + f¯1E                                 (113)
                                                           P1,N E
Differentiating both sides of the previous equations with respect to pBT , we obtain

                                                            W dP0      df0I
                                                       −             =                                                (114)
                                                           (P0 )2 dp    dp

                                               W        dP1,BT   dC  df I df¯E
                                      −                        =    − 0 + 1                                           (115)
                                          (P1,BT   )2     dp     dp   dp   dp
                                                         qW dP1,E   dC
                                                   −          2
                                                                  =                                                   (116)
                                                       (P1,E ) dp   dp
                                              (1 − q)W dP1,N E   df I df¯E
                                          −            2
                                                               =− 0 + 1                                               (117)
                                              (P1,N E )  dp       dp   dp
Moreover, optimal quantities are given by
                                                                              
                               κ1 κ2
                      f¯1E =          pBT (1 − τ1,BT )P1,BT + (1 − pBT )P1,N E                                        (118)
                             κ1 + κ2
                                                                                                        
                         1      κ1    κ1
                    f0I = f¯0I + P0 −                      pBT (1 − τ1,BT )P1,BT + (1 − pBT )P1,N E                   (119)
                             2        2            2




                                                                   47
                                                                       
                                       C = δ pBT P1,BT + (1 − pBT )P1,E                                   (120)

which implies

    df¯1E
                                                                                              
             κ1 κ2                                                 dP1,BT              dP1,N E
          =          (1 − τ1,BT )P1,BT − P1,N E + pBT (1 − τ1,BT )        + (1 − pBT )                    (121)
     dp     κ1 + κ2                                                  dp                  dp

  df0I
                                                                                               
         κ1 dP0   κ1                                                dP1,BT              dP1,N E
       =        −     (1 − τ1,BT )P1,BT − P1,N E + pBT (1 − τ1,BT )        + (1 − pBT )                   (122)
   dp    2 dp     2                                                   dp                  dp
                                                                              
                       dC                           dP1,BT               dP1,E
                           = δ P1,BT − P1,E + pBT           + (1 − pBT )                                  (123)
                       dp                             dp                   dp
                                                                                                   df I
Let us show that we have dP                                  dP0
                           dp ≤ 0. By contradiction, suppose dp > 0. Then, (114) implies dp < 0.
                             0                                                            0


But then, using (122), we have

                                                                dP1,BT              dP1,N E
                (1 − τ1,BT )P1,BT − P1,N E + pBT (1 − τ1,BT )          + (1 − pBT )         >0            (124)
                                                                  dp                  dp

                                     df¯E                                       dP
                                                                                1,N E
It then follows from (121) that dp1 > 0, which implies, using (117), that dp          < 0. Now, note that
market clearing conditions and P1,E ≤ P1,N E imply that P1,BT < P1,N E . Using (124), it then follows
      dP1,BT                                                                                    dP1,E
that dp       > 0, which in turn implies, using (115), that dC
                                                            dp < 0. But then, (116) implies that dp > 0,
                                                                                                 dP0
which in turn implies, using (123), that dC  dp > 0. This is a contradiction, so we must have dp ≤ 0.
                  dP0
Assuming then dp = 0 and following the previous steps yields immediately a contradiction, hence it
must be dP dp > 0.
             0


    Finally, following the same steps as in the proof of Proposition 5, we can immediately see that if the
incumbent fully exhausts its production capacity in the CT state only, then the effect of changes in the
breakthrough probability on the date-0 energy price is in general ambiguous.
    We now show how profits of the various firms change with changes in the probability of the techno-
logical breakthrough. To ease notation, suppose that the taxes on carbon emissions and new production
capacity are set to zero, as this has no consequences for the proof. Let us start from the entrant fossil
fuel firm. Assuming that the production constraint is always binding, we have
                                                                           
                                       κ1 κ2
                               f¯1E =          pBT P1,BT + (1 − pBT )P1,N E
                                      κ1 + κ2

which implies that total expected profits in period 0 are
                                                                              2
                                       1 κ1 κ2
                              ΠE
                               0 =                pBT P1,BT + (1 − pBT )P1,N E
                                       2 κ1 + κ2

It follows that

  dΠE
                                                                                             
     0    κ1 κ2                                                     dP1,BT              dP1,N E
       =          pBT P1,BT + (1 − pBT )P1,N E P1,BT − P1,N E + pBT        + (1 − pBT )
  dpBT   κ1 + κ2                                                     dpBT                dpBT

                                     df¯E                                            dΠE
In section B.1, we showed that dpBT1
                                      ≤ 0. But then it follows immediately that dpBT
                                                                                   0
                                                                                     ≤ 0.
    Turning to the incumbent fossil fuel firm, and considering again the case where the production
constraint is always binding, total expected profits in period 0 are

                                      1 ¯I           1                  1 ¯I 2
                             ΠI0 =     f (P0 + P1 ) + κ1 (P0 − P1 )2 −    (f )
                                      2 0            4                 4κ1 0




                                                       48
where P1 := pBT P1,BT + (1 − pBT )P1,N E . Hence, it follows that

             dΠI0
                                         
                     1 ¯I                   dP0
                  =     f0 + κ1 (P0 − P1 )
              dp     2                       dp
                                                                                     
                    1 ¯I                                    dP1,BT              dP1,N E
                  + f0 − κ1 (P0 − P1 ) P1,BT − P1,N E + pBT        + (1 − pBT )
                    2                                        dpBT                dpBT

We showed before that dP dp ≤ 0. Moreover, we argued before that the last term in square brackets in the
                           0


previous expression is negative, and we also have f¯0I − κ1 (P0 − P1 ) ≥ 0, which follows immediately from
                                            I   ¯I                                     ¯I
                                   and f0≤ f0 . For the last step, we also have f0 + κ1 (P0 − P1 ) ≥ 0,
the incumbent’s optimality condition
which follows from P0 − P1 = κ21 f0I − 12 f¯0I             and f0I ≥ 0.
    Finally, consider the renewable energy producer. Its profits are given by
                                                                  
                                                                       1 2
                              ΠR
                               0 = C  p   P
                                        BT 1,BT + (1 −  p BT )P 1,E −     C
                                                                       2δ

using                                                                    
                                         C = δ pBT P1,BT + (1 − pBT )P1,E

we have                                                                   2
                                             δ
                                      ΠR
                                       0 =      pBT P1,BT + (1 − pBT )P1,E
                                             2
Therefore, this implies

        dΠR
                                                                                      
           0                                                   dP1,BT              dP1,E
             = δ pBT P1,BT + (1 − pBT )P1,E P1,BT − P1,E + pBT        + (1 − pBT )         ≥0
         dp                                                     dpBT               dpBT

where the results follows from dC
                               dp ≥ 0 and (123).




B.3      Proof of Proposition 7: Effects of Carbon Tax
First, consider the case where the carbon tax is low enough so that the production constraint of both
fossil fuel firms is binding in both scenarios in period 1. Differentiating both sides of the market clearing
conditions with respect to τ1,BT , we obtain

                                                      W dP0          df0I
                                              −                   =                                     (125)
                                                     (P0 )2 τ1,BT   dτ1,BT

                                      W      dP1,BT               dC      df0I     df¯1E
                               −                            =          −        +                       (126)
                                   (P1,BT )2 dτ1,BT             dτ1,BT   dτ1,BT   dτ1,BT
                                                   qW dP1,E         dC
                                             −          2
                                                                =                                       (127)
                                                 (P1,E ) dτ1,BT   dτ1,BT
                                        (1 − q)W dP1,N E     df0I     df¯1E
                                    −            2
                                                         =−        +                                    (128)
                                        (P1,N E ) dτ1,BT    dτ1,BT   dτ1,BT
Optimal quantities are now given by
                                                                                         
                               (1 − τ̄0 )κ1 κ2
                     f¯1E =                      pBT (1 − τ1,BT )P1,BT + (1 − pBT )P1,N E               (129)
                              κ1 + (1 − τ̄0 )κ2
                                                                                                   
                         1      κ1    κ1
                    f0I = f¯0I + P0 −                    pBT (1 − τ1,BT )P1,BT + (1 − pBT )P1,N E       (130)
                          2          2           2



                                                                 49
                                                                      
                                      C = δ pBT P1,BT + (1 − pBT )P1,E                              (131)

which implies that we have

       df¯1E
                                                                                             
                (1 − τ̄0 )κ1 κ2                                   dP1,BT              dP1,N E
             =                     − pBT P1,BT + pBT (1 − τ1,BT )        + (1 − pBT )               (132)
      dτ1,BT   κ1 + (1 − τ̄0 )κ2                                  dτ1,BT              dτ1,BT

       df0I
                                                                                          
               κ1 dP0     κ1                                  dP1,BT               dP1,N E
             =          −      − pBT P1,BT + pBT (1 − τ1,BT )         + (1 − pBT )                  (133)
      dτ1,BT   2 dτ1,BT   2                                   dτ1,BT               dτ1,BT
                                                                      
                             dC            dP1,BT                dP1,E
                                  = δ pBT          + (1 − pBT )                                     (134)
                          dτ1,BT           dτ1,BT               dτ1,BT
We can proceed as in the proof for Proposition 1 to show that dτdP 0
                                                                 1,BT
                                                                      ≤ 0. Suppose by contradiction
                                       df I
that dτdP 0
        1,BT
             > 0. Then, by (125), dτ1,BT
                                      0
                                         < 0. It follows from (133) that

                                                              dP1,BT              dP1,N E
                     −pBT P1,BT + pBT (1 − τ1,BT )                   + (1 − pBT )         >0        (135)
                                                              dτ1,BT              dτ1,BT

                                                    df¯E                            1,N E      dP
which in turn implies, using (132), that dτ1,BT
                                             1
                                                > 0. Using (128), it follows that dτ1,BT  < 0, which
                           dP1,BT
implies, using (135), that dτ1,BT > 0. It then follows from (126) that dτdC
                                                                         1,BT
                                                                              < 0 which in turn implies
                dP1,E
from (33) that dτ1,BT > 0. But then, (134) implies that dτdC
                                                          1,BT
                                                               > 0, a contradiction. Therefore, it must
be that dτdP 0
           1,BT
                ≤ 0.
    Consider now the case where τ1,BT → 1. This implies that the production constraint of the fossil
fuel firms becomes binding in the Current Technology scenario only. Assume that the initial capacity of
the incumbent firm is large enough so that it is less constrained that the entrant firm. We therefore have
two cases to consider:
    Case 1: Production constraint of the entrant firm binding in both technology scenarios; production
constraint of the incumbent firm binding in the CT scenario only. Market clearing conditions are

                                                           W
                                                              = f0I                                 (136)
                                                           P0

                                               W           I
                                                    = C + f1,BT + f¯1E                              (137)
                                              P1,BT
                                                            W
                                                       q        =C                                  (138)
                                                           P1,E
                                                       W
                                         (1 − q)              = f¯0I − f0I + f¯1E                   (139)
                                                     P1,N E
Differentiating both sides of the previous equations with respect to the tax rate, we obtain

                                                   W     dP0      df0I
                                              −        2
                                                               =                                    (140)
                                                  (P0 ) dτ1,BT   dτ1,BT

                                                               I
                                   W       dP1,BT     dC     df1,BT    df¯1E
                             −           2
                                                  =        +        +                               (141)
                                 (P1,BT ) dτ1,BT    dτ1,BT   dτ1,BT   dτ1,BT
                                                    qW dP1,E         dC
                                              −          2
                                                                 =                                  (142)
                                                  (P1,E ) dτ1,BT   dτ1,BT
                                      (1 − q)W dP1,N E       df0I     df¯1E
                                  −                     = −        +                                (143)
                                      (P1,N E )2 dτ1,BT     dτ1,BT   dτ1,BT




                                                              50
Optimal quantities are given by

                                         κ1          (1 − pBT )κ1           1 − pBT ¯I
                               f0I =            P0 −               P1,N E +         f                                  (144)
                                    2 − pBT             2 − pBT             2 − pBT 0
                                                                                           
                                (1 − τ̄0 )κ1 κ2
                        f¯1E =                     pBT (1 − τ1,BT )P1,BT + (1 − pBT )P1,N E                            (145)
                               κ1 + (1 − τ̄0 )κ2
                                             I
                                            f1,BT = κ1 (1 − τ1,BT )P1,BT                                               (146)
                                                                         
                                         C = δ pBT P1,BT + (1 − pBT )P1,E                                              (147)

which implies
                                 df0I         κ1    dP0      (1 − pBT )κ1 dP1,N E
                                        =                 −                                                            (148)
                               dτ1,BT      2 − pBT dτ1,BT      2 − pBT dτ1,BT
          df¯1E
                                                                                                  
                   (1 − τ̄0 )κ1 κ2                                    dP1,BT               dP1,N E
                =                      − pBT P1,BT + pBT (1 − τ1,BT )         + (1 − pBT )                             (149)
         dτ1,BT   κ1 + (1 − τ̄0 )κ2                                   dτ1,BT               dτ1,BT
                                     I
                                  df1,BT
                                                                              
                                                                        dP1,BT
                                          = κ1 − P1,BT + (1 − τ1,BT )                                                  (150)
                                  dτ1,BT                                dτ1,BT
                                                                              
                                    dC             dP1,BT                dP1,E
                                          = δ pBT          + (1 − pBT )                                                (151)
                                  dτ1,BT           dτ1,BT               dτ1,BT
To show that dτdP 0
                1,BT
                     ≥ 0, we proceed in various steps. First, we show that dτdC
                                                                             1,BT
                                                                                  ≥ 0. Suppose that
                                              1,E        dP                              1,BT                  dP
the opposite holds. Then, by (142) we have dτ1,BT > 0. This implies, using (151), that dτ1,BT < 0.
                                 df I                                           df¯E
Using (150) we then have dτ1,BT
                           1,BT
                                < 0, and using (141) we have dτ1,BT
                                                                 1
                                                                    > 0. Then, from (149) we find
dP1,N E                                                df0I                                     dP0
 dτ1,BT > 0, which implies using (143) that dτ1,BT > 0. But then (140) implies dτ1,BT < 0 and (148) gives
dP1,N E                                                                     dC                                      dP1,E
 dτ1,BT < 0, which is a contradiction. Therefore, it must be dτ1,BT ≥ 0, which in turn implies dτ1,BT ≤ 0
      dP1,BT
and dτ1,BT    ≥ 0 following the same steps.
                            df I                                                                            df¯1E
     We now show that dτ1,BT   1,BT
                                       ≤ 0. Suppose that the opposite holds. Then, (141) implies dτ1,BT               < 0, and
                                                                        I
                       dP1,N E                                        df0
using (55) we get dτ1,BT         < 0. But then (143) implies dτ1,BT          < 0, (140) implies dτdP    0
                                                                                                      1,BT
                                                                                                           > 0, and (148)
                                                          I
          dP1,N E                                      df1,BT
implies dτ1,BT > 0, a contradiction. Hence, dτ1,BT ≤ 0.
                               df¯1E                                 dP1,N E                               df0I
     Then, suppose that dτ1,BT          > 0. From (149) we have dτ1,BT       > 0, from (143) we have dτ1,BT         > 0, from
                   dP0                                        dP1,N E                                           df¯1E
(140) we have dτ1,BT < 0 and from (148) we have dτ1,BT < 0, a contradiction. Therefore, dτ1,BT ≤ 0
                                              dP1,N E                                          df0I
     For the next step, suppose that dτ1,BT           < 0. Then, using (143) we have dτ1,BT           < 0, using (140) we
        dP0                                        dP1,N E                                         dP1,N E
have dτ1,BT > 0, and using (148) we get dτ1,BT > 0, a contradiction. Therefore, dτ1,BT ≥ 0.
                                                                                      df0I
     Finally, suppose that dτdP        0
                                     1,BT
                                          < 0. Using (140), this implies that dτ1,BT          > 0. From (148), it then
               dP1,N E                                                                    dP0
follows that dτ1,BT < 0, a contradiction. This proves that we must have dτ1,BT ≥ 0.
    Case 2: Production constraint of both firms binding in the CT scenario only. In this case, we have
 dP0
dτ1,BT= 0. Market clearing conditions are now

                                                            W
                                                               = f0I                                                   (152)
                                                            P0

                                                W            I       E
                                                      = C + f1,BT + f1,BT                                              (153)
                                              P1,BT
                                                             W
                                                        q        =C                                                    (154)
                                                            P1,E




                                                              51
                                                        W
                                          (1 − q)              = f¯0I − f0I + f¯1E                   (155)
                                                      P1,N E
Differentiating both sides of the previous equations with respect to the tax rate, we obtain

                                                    W     dP0      df0I
                                               −        2
                                                                =                                    (156)
                                                   (P0 ) dτ1,BT   dτ1,BT

                                                              I        E
                                   W      dP1,BT     dC     df1,BT   df1,BT
                            −                    =        +        +                                 (157)
                                (P1,BT )2 dτ1,BT   dτ1,BT   dτ1,BT   dτ1,BT
                                                     qW dP1,E         dC
                                               −          2
                                                                  =                                  (158)
                                                   (P1,E ) dτ1,BT   dτ1,BT
                                      (1 − q)W dP1,N E       df0I     df¯1E
                                  −                     = −        +                                 (159)
                                      (P1,N E )2 dτ1,BT     dτ1,BT   dτ1,BT
Optimal quantities are now given by

                                     κ1        (1 − pBT )κ1          1 − pBT ¯I
                          f0I =           P0 −              P1,N E +         f                       (160)
                                  2 − pBT        2 − pBT             2 − pBT 0

                                                (1 − pBT )(1 − τ̄0 )κ1 κ2
                                      f¯1E =                               P1,N E                    (161)
                                               κ1 + (1 − pBT )(1 − τ̄0 )κ2
                                       I       E
                                      f1,BT = f1,BT = κ1 (1 − τ1,BT )P1,BT                           (162)
                                                                        
                                      C = δ pBT P1,BT + (1 − pBT )P1,E                               (163)

which implies
                             df0I       κ1    dP0     (1 − pBT )κ1 dP1,N E
                                   =                −                                                (164)
                            dτ1,BT   2 − pBT dτ1,BT     2 − pBT dτ1,BT
                                 df¯1E       (1 − pBT )(1 − τ̄0 )κ1 κ2 dP1,N E
                                        =                                                            (165)
                                dτ1,BT     κ1 + (1 − pBT )(1 − τ̄0 )κ2 dτ1,BT
                           I            E
                         df1,BT       df1,BT
                                                                                    
                                                                             dP1,BT
                                  =           = κ1 − P1,BT + (1 − τ1,BT )                            (166)
                        ddτ1,BT      ddτ1,BT                                  dτ1,BT
                                                                              
                                 dC              dP1,BT                 dP1,E
                                        = δ pBT          + (1 − pBT )                                (167)
                               dτ1,BT            dτ1,BT                dτ1,BT
                                                                            df I
Suppose first that dτdP 0
                      1,BT
                           < 0. Using (156), this implies that dτ1,BT
                                                                   0
                                                                      > 0. From (164), it then follows that
dP1,N E                                      df¯1E                                            dP1,N E
 dτ1,BT < 0. This implies, from (159), that dτ1,BT > 0. But then, from (165), it follows that dτ1,BT > 0.
This is a contradiction, hence it must be dτdP  0
                                             1,BT
                                                   ≥ 0. Assume now that dτdP    0
                                                                              1,BT
                                                                                   > 0. Using (156), this
                 I
               df0                                         dP1,N E                              df¯1E
implies that dτ1,BT < 0. From (164), it then follows that dτ1,BT > 0. Then, from (159), this dτ1,BT   < 0.
                                    dP1,N E                                                     dP0
But it then follows from (165) that dτ1,BT > 0, which is a contradiction. It must therefore be dτ1,BT = 0.
                                                   df0I     df¯1E    dP1,N E
Following the same reasoning, this also implies dτ1,BT  = dτ1,BT   = dτ1,BT  =0



Appendix C              Carbon Tax on Production rather than on Sales
In the main text, we assumed that taxes in the BT scenario are imposed on sales of fossil fuels, rather
than directly on units produced. Under this alternative specification, the period 1 problems of the




                                                               52
                            Time-0 Price                                                    Time-1 Prices
                                                                              BT Price
                                                                              CT-E Price
 3.01                                                            3.00         CT-NE Price

 3.00                                                            2.50

 2.99                                                            2.00

 2.98                                                            1.50

 2.97                                                            1.00
        0.0    0.5        1.0     1.5      2.0     2.5    3.0           0.0    0.5        1.0      1.5      2.0    2.5    3.0
                     Time-0 Fossil Fuel Supply                                 Time-1 Energy Supply Capacity
                                                                 0.70
 1.01
 1.01                                                            0.60
 1.01
                                                                 0.50
 1.00                                                                                                     Entrant Capacity
                                                                                                          Incumbent Capacity
 1.00                                                            0.40                                     Renewable Capacity
 1.00
 1.00                                                            0.30

 1.00                                                            0.20
 0.99
        0.0    0.5        1.0     1.5      2.0     2.5    3.0           0.0    0.5        1.0      1.5      2.0    2.5    3.0
                       Total Expected Profits                                                   Emissions
              Entrant                                            1.00
 1.60         Incumbent
              Renewable
 1.40
                                                                 0.90
 1.20
                                                                 0.80
 1.00

 0.80                                                            0.70
 0.60                                                                         Time-0 Emissions
                                                                              Time-1 Expected Emissions
                                                                 0.60         Total
 0.40
        0.0    0.5       1.0      1.5      2.0      2.5   3.0           0.0    0.5       1.0      1.5      2.0      2.5   3.0
                     Carbon tax rate in BT scenario                                  Carbon tax rate in BT scenario

Figure 7: Equilibrium effects of changes in BT tax rate. Note that profits for each producer are normalized by
their profits for pBT = 0, whereas emissions are normalized for each period and total by the corresponding value
for pBT = 1. BT scenario probability is fixed at pBT = 0.5.




                                                                53
incumbent fossil fuel producer in the BT scenario would be

                                                    I          1
                               max (P1,BT − τ1,BT )f1,BT −       (f I )2 ,
                                I
                               f1,BT                          2κ1 1,BT

                I
subject to 0 ≤ f1,BT ≤ f¯0I − f0I , while the problem of the entrant firm would be

                                                    E          1
                               max (P1,BT − τ1,BT )f1,BT −       (f E )2 ,
                                E
                               f1,BT                          2κ1 1,BT

                E
subject to 0 ≤ f1,BT  ≤ f¯1E .
    Note that this formulation of the model is equivalent to our main specification, as if the government
where to set a tax on fossil fuel emissions higher than the equilibrium price, then both firms would
choose not to produce in that scenario. Indeed, Figure 7 shows the same exercise as in the previous
section, and we can see that the results are qualitatively the same. We therefore maintain the initial
model formulation.




                                                   54
Appendix D               Additional Data Details
D.1     Measuring Climate Transition Risks By GPT
We construct several indices measuring climate transition risks outlined in our model by applying state-
of-the-art large language models (LLMs) to news articles published in the New York Times (NYT).
LLMs are a type of artificial intelligence (AI) models designed to understand, generate, and interact
with human-like text. LLMs are leading in performance across a range of natural language processing
(NLP) tasks, largely due to their extensive scale and architectural innovations. We employ GPT-4o Mini,
one of the most advanced LLMs pre-trained by OpenAI.16

D.1.1     Pre-processing
We obtained historical NYT news articles through LexisNexis, covering a 12-year period from 2012 to
2023. We first need to identify news articles relevant to the climate transition risks we are measuring,
which are restrictions on new fossil fuel production capacity, the cost of emissions, and the possibility of a
technological breakthrough that improves renewable energy firms’ ability to provide energy to all sectors.
We filtered all NYT articles that contain at least one of the following terms: “carbon”, “renewable”,
“drilling”, “fossil”, “oil and gas”, “emissions”, “solar”, or “pipeline”. We believe these terms provide a
comprehensive dataset, capturing most articles relevant to our topics. For instance, articles discussing
carbon emissions pricing likely mentioned the term “carbon” at least once. While this approach might
also include some irrelevant articles, such as those about drilling on Mars, the capability of the GPT
model to filter out irrelevant information, as demonstrated in Table 5, ensures these articles do not
compromise our index construction.
    The LexisNexis dataset includes both electronic (online) and printed versions of news articles, which
sometimes feature different titles and slight sentence adjustments. For example, the article titled “Seismic
Survey of Alaskan Arctic Refuge Won’t Move Forward” appeared online in the New York Times on
February 22, 2021, and the same article was published in the printed version under the headline “A
Deadline Missed Kills An Oil Survey In the Arctic” on February 23, 2021. Similarly, the online article
“Obama Climate Plan, Now in Court, May Hinge on Error in 1990 Law” from September 25, 2016,
corresponds to the printed article “Obama’s Climate Change Plan May Hinge on a Clerical Error in
a 1990 Law” from September 26, 2016. We eliminated such “duplicates”, retaining only the one that
appeared first.17

D.1.2     Article-level Analysis by GPT
Beyond the initial filtering and cleaning, we made queries to OpenAI’s GPT-4o Mini model instance with
each query for one NYT news article. We report the prompts used to query GPT below. Overall, this
prompt has three parts: 1) news article input, where “%s” indicates the inserted location of the news
article we want to analyze; 2) guidence of the output structure; 3) questions. We separate our queries
by transition risk type to minimize context-switching and potential model performance degradation. For
each transition risk, we pose questions across multiple topics, including some not directly analyzed but
provided guidance to GPT.18 For each topic, we pose four questions. The first question assesses the
  16
      The OpenAI model we used is gpt-4o-mini-2024-07-18.
  17
      We use TF-IDF to embed documents into a 256-dimensional vector and compute cosine similarity for all pairs
of articles. For those very similar articles (i.e., cosine similarity > 0.97), we only keep the one that appeared
first. TF-IDF, which stands for term frequency-inverse document frequency, is a numerical representation used in
information retrieval and NLP. It measures the importance of a term in a collection of documents by considering
its frequency within a document (TF) and its rarity across the entire collection (IDF).
   18
      In our theoretical analysis, we focus on breakthrough probability pBT . To avoid GPT classifying articles
about cost of production of renewable energy δ as related to probability of renewable breakthrough, we explicitly
included policies subsidizing or supporting renewable energy production as a topic. In our oil capacity prompt,
we include subtopics like permit availability, financing availability, and compliance standards to guide GPT’s
interpretation of factors affecting the maximum production capacity of fossil fuels companies.


                                                       55
relevance of the article to the targeted topic, guiding the model toward the specific transition risk we
are measuring. The second question determines the direction indicated by the news article concerning
the topic, such as whether it suggests a tightening or loosening of policy regarding that topic. The third
question evaluates the strength of this direction, and the fourth question estimates the potential impact
of the news on market prices and operational strategies of fossil fuel producers.

  Here is a news article:

  “%s”

  Please answer the following questions and present your findings as a single JSON object, conforming to the
  following structure:

  {’Question1’: ’(choice id)’};
  {’Question2’: ’(choice id)’};
  {’Question3’: ’(choice id)’};
  {’Question4’: ’(choice id)’};
  {’Question5’: ’(choice id)’};
  {’Question6’: ’(choice id)’};
  {’Question7’: ’(choice id)’};
  {’Question8’: ’(choice id)’};
  {’Question9’: Provide detailed explanations on Question1 to Question4, identifying specific parts of the
  article or exact policies discussed that contribute to this score. The explanation should be concise and
  precise, directly relating to the aspects mentioned in the article. (less than 150 words)};
  {’Question10’: Provide detailed explanations on Question5 to Question8, identifying specific parts of the
  article or exact policies discussed that contribute to this score. The explanation should be concise and
  precise, directly relating to the aspects mentioned in the article. (less than 150 words)};

  ---

  Question1: Does this article discuss U.S. carbon pricing policy, or factors related to U.S. carbon pricing
  policy?
  (a) Yes
  (b) No - If answered ”No”, skip Question2,3,4 (answer (c) in Question2, (e) in Question3, and (e) in
  Question4).

  Question2: Does this article indicate a tightening or loosening U.S. carbon pricing policy?
  (a) Tightening
  (b) Loosening
  (c) Neutral - The article does not provide specific details or evidence regarding changes in U.S. carbon
  pricing policy.

  Question3: How likely is the change you indicated in Question2?
  (a) Extremely Likely
  (b) Very Likely
  (c) Somewhat Likely
  (d) Slightly Likely
  (e) Neutral - if answered Neutral in Question2.

  Question4: How significant do you anticipate the impact of this news about U.S. carbon pricing policy will
  be on the market prices and operational strategies of companies in the fossil fuel industry?
  (a) Most Significant Impact19
  (b) Highly Significant Impact20
  (c) Moderate Impact21
  (d) Minimal Impact22
  (e) No Impact23

  Question5: Does this article discuss regulatory or financial cost of carbon emissions in U.S., or factors related
  to regulatory or financial cost of carbon emissions in U.S.?



                                                         56
(a) Yes
(b) No - If answered ”No”, skip Question6,7,8 (answer (c) in Question6, (e) in Question7, and (e) in
Question8).

Question6: Does this article indicate a tightening or loosening U.S. carbon pricing policy?
(a) Tightening
(b) Loosening
(c) Neutral - The article does not provide specific details or evidence regarding changes in regulatory or
financial cost of carbon emissions in U.S..

Question7: How likely is the change you indicated in Question6?
(a) Extremely Likely
(b) Very Likely
(c) Somewhat Likely
(d) Slightly Likely
(e) Neutral - if answered Neutral in Question6.

Question8: How significant do you anticipate the impact of this news about regulatory or financial cost of
carbon emissions in U.S. will be on the market prices and operational strategies of companies in the fossil
fuel industry?
(a) Most Significant Impact18
(b) Highly Significant Impact19
(c) Moderate Impact20
(d) Minimal Impact21
(e) No Impact22


Here is a news article:

“%s”

Please answer the following questions and present your findings as a single JSON object, conforming to the
following structure:

{’Question1’: ’(choice id)’};
{’Question2’: ’(choice id)’};
{’Question3’: ’(choice id)’};
{’Question4’: ’(choice id)’};
{’Question5’: ’(choice id)’};
{’Question6’: ’(choice id)’};
{’Question7’: ’(choice id)’};
{’Question8’: ’(choice id)’};
{’Question9’: ’(choice id)’};
{’Question10’: ’(choice id)’};
{’Question11’: Provide detailed explanations on Question1 to Question4, identifying specific parts of the
article or exact policies discussed that contribute to this score. The explanation should be concise and
precise, directly relating to the aspects mentioned in the article. (less than 150 words)};
{’Question12’: Provide detailed explanations on Question5 to Question6, identifying specific parts of the
article or exact policies discussed that contribute to this score. The explanation should be concise and
precise, directly relating to the aspects mentioned in the article. (less than 150 words)};
{’Question13’: Provide detailed explanations on Question7 to Question10, identifying specific parts of the
article or exact policies discussed that contribute to this score. The explanation should be concise and
precise, directly relating to the aspects mentioned in the article. (less than 150 words)};

---

Question1: Does this article discuss renewable energy or battery storage technology breakthroughs, or fac-
tors related to renewable energy or battery storage technology breakthroughs?
(a) Yes



                                                    57
(b) No - If answered ”No”, skip Question2,3,4 (answer (c) in Question2, (e) in Question3, and (e) in Ques-
tion4).

Question2: Does this article indicate an increase or decrease in renewable energy or battery storage tech-
nology breakthrough probabilities?
(a) Increase
(b) Decrease
(c) Neutral - The article does not provide specific details or evidence regarding renewable energy or battery
storage technology breakthrough probabilities.

Question3: How likely is the change you indicated in Question2?
(a) Extremely Likely
(b) Very Likely
(c) Somewhat Likely
(d) Slightly Likely
(e) Neutral - if answered Neutral in Question2.

Question4: How significant do you anticipate the impact of this news about renewable energy or battery
storage technology breakthroughs will be on the market prices and operational strategies of companies in
fossil fuel industry?
(a) Most Significant Impact18
(b) Highly Significant Impact19
(c) Moderate Impact20
(d) Minimal Impact21
(e) No Impact22

Question5: Does this article discuss actual or realized technology breakthroughs (not just plans and invest-
ments) on renewable energy or battery storage?
(a) Yes
(b) No - If answered ”No”, skip Question6 (answer (e) in Question6).

Question6: How significant do you anticipate the impact of this news about actual or realized technology
breakthroughs on renewable energy or battery storage will be on the market prices and operational strategies
of companies in the fossil fuel industry?
(a) Most Significant Impact18
(b) Highly Significant Impact19
(c) Moderate Impact20
(d) Minimal Impact21
(e) No Impact22

Question7: Does this article discuss policies that subsidize or support the production of renewable energy,
or factors related to policies that subsidize or support the production of renewable energy?
(a) Yes
(b) No - If answered ”No”, skip Question8,9,10 (answer (c) in Question8, (e) in Question9, and (e) in Ques-
tion10).

Question8: Does this article indicate tightening or loosening policies that subsidize or support the produc-
tion of renewable energy?
(a) Tightening
(b) Loosening
(c) Neutral - The article does not provide specific details or evidence regarding changes in policies that
subsidize or support the production of renewable energy.

Question9: How likely is the change you indicated in Question8?
(a) Extremely Likely
(b) Very Likely
(c) Somewhat Likely
(d) Slightly Likely




                                                     58
  (e) Neutral - if answered Neutral in Question8.

  Question10: How significant do you anticipate the impact of this news about policies that subsidize or sup-
  port the production of renewable energy will be on the market prices and operational strategies of companies
  in the fossil fuel industry?
  (a) Most Significant Impact18
  (b) Highly Significant Impact19
  (c) Moderate Impact20
  (d) Minimal Impact21
  (e) No Impact22



  Here is a news article:

  “%s”

  Please answer the following questions and present your findings as a single JSON object, conforming to the
  following structure:

  {’Question1’: ’(choice id)’};
  {’Question2’: ’(choice id)’};
  {’Question3’: ’(choice id)’};
  {’Question4’: ’(choice id)’};
  {’Question5’: ’(choice id)’};
  {’Question6’: ’(choice id)’};
  {’Question7’: ’(choice id)’};
  {’Question8’: ’(choice id)’};
  {’Question9’: ’(choice id)’};
  {’Question10’: ’(choice id)’};
  {’Question11’: ’(choice id)’};
  {’Question12’: ’(choice id)’};
  {’Question13’: ’(choice id)’};
  {’Question14’: ’(choice id)’};
  {’Question15’: ’(choice id)’};
  {’Question16’: ’(choice id)’};
  {’Question17’: Provide detailed explanations on Question1 to Question4, identifying specific parts of the
  article or exact policies discussed that contribute to this score. The explanation should be concise and
  precise, directly relating to the aspects mentioned in the article. (less than 150 words)};
  {’Question18’: Provide detailed explanations on Question5 to Question8, identifying specific parts of the
  article or exact policies discussed that contribute to this score. The explanation should be concise and
  precise, directly relating to the aspects mentioned in the article. (less than 150 words)};
  {’Question19’: Provide detailed explanations on Question9 to Question12, identifying specific parts of the
  article or exact policies discussed that contribute to this score. The explanation should be concise and
  precise, directly relating to the aspects mentioned in the article. (less than 150 words)};
  {’Question20’: Provide detailed explanations on Question13 to Question16, identifying specific parts of the


  19
      We also provide detailed instructions to the GPT model to identify articles that should be considered of most
significant impact: This news is amongst the most impactful on fossil fuel producers in a given year. It’s likely
to lead to extreme fluctuations in market prices and will force companies to alter their long-term operational
strategies and investment plans.
   20
      This news will have a large impact on fossil fuel producers. It’s likely to lead to considerable fluctuations in
market prices and may prompt these companies to re-evaluate and alter their long-term operational strategies.
   21
      There might be some short-term volatility in market prices, but the long-term operational strategies of these
companies are likely to remain largely unchanged.
   22
      This news is unlikely to have a substantial impact on fossil fuel producers. There might be slight and
temporary fluctuations in market prices, but the overall business operations and strategies of these companies
are expected to remain stable and largely unaffected by this development.
   23
      The article has negligible impact on both the prices and operational strategies of fossil fuel producers.


                                                         59
article or exact policies discussed that contribute to this score. The explanation should be concise and
precise, directly relating to the aspects mentioned in the article. (less than 150 words)};

---

Question1: Does this article discuss policies or regulations which directly affect the ability of fossil fuel
companies to expand their maximum production capacity?
(a) Yes
(b) No - If answered ”No”, skip Question2,3,4 (answer (c) in Question2, (e) in Question3, and (e) in Ques-
tion4).

Question2: Does this article indicate policies or regulations which expand or restrict the ability of fossil fuel
companies to expand their production capacity?
(a) Restriction
(b) Expansion
(c) Neutral - The article does not provide specific details or evidence regarding the ability of fossil fuel
companies to expand their production capacity.

Question3: How likely is the change you indicated in Question2?
(a) Extremely Likely
(b) Very Likely
(c) Somewhat Likely
(d) Slightly Likely
(e) Neutral - if answered Neutral in Question2.

Question4: How significant do you anticipate the impact of this news about regulations impacting fossil fuel
production capacity will be on the market prices and operational strategies of fossil fuel companies? Please
also include news not related to the United States.
(a) Most Significant Impact24
(b) Highly Significant Impact25
(c) Moderate Impact26
(d) Minimal Impact27
(e) No Impact28

Question5: Does this article discuss licensing and permit regulations for fossil fuel production, like trans-
portation and export permit availability, or oil and gas lease access? Please also include news not related
to the United States.
(a) Yes
(b) No - If answered ”No”, skip Question6,7,8 (answer (c) in Question6, (e) in Question7, and (e) in Ques-
tion8).

Question6: Does this article indicate a tightening or loosening U.S. carbon pricing policy?
(a) Tightening
(b) Loosening
(c) Neutral - The article does not provide specific details or evidence regarding changes in regulatory or
financial cost of carbon emissions in U.S..

Question7: How likely is the change you indicated in Question6?
(a) Extremely Likely
(b) Very Likely
(c) Somewhat Likely
(d) Slightly Likely
(e) Neutral - if answered Neutral in Question6.

Question8: How significant do you anticipate the impact of this news about regulatory or financial cost of
carbon emissions in U.S. will be on the market prices and operational strategies of companies in the fossil
fuel industry?
(a) Most Significant Impact23
(b) Highly Significant Impact24




                                                       60
(c) Moderate Impact25
(d) Minimal Impact26
(e) No Impact27

Question9: Does this article discuss policies or regulations which directly impact the availability of financing
for fossil fuel infrastructure, or factors affecting it, such as shifts in bank funding policies or shareholder
activism? Please also include news not related to the United States.
(a) Yes
(b) No - If answered ”No”, skip Question10,11,12 (answer (c) in Question10, (e) in Question11, and (e) in
Question12).

Question10: Does this article indicate policies or regulations that expand or restrict fossil fuel infrastructure
financing availability? Please also include news not related to the United States.
(a) Restriction
(b) Expansion
(c) Neutral - The article does not provide specific details or evidence regarding fossil fuel infrastructure
financing availability.

Question11: How likely is the change you indicated in Question10?
(a) Extremely Likely
(b) Very Likely
(c) Somewhat Likely
(d) Slightly Likely
(e) Neutral - if answered Neutral in Question10.

Question12: How significant do you anticipate the impact of this news about infrastructure financing avail-
ability will be on the market prices and operational strategies of fossil fuel companies? Please also include
news not related to the United States.
(a) Most Significant Impact23
(b) Highly Significant Impact24
(c) Moderate Impact25
(d) Minimal Impact26
(e) No Impact27

Question13: Does this article discuss policies or regulation directly affecting the compliance requirements
of fossil fuel infrastructure, including factors like oil well emissions standards or offshore drilling safety re-
quirements? Please also include news not related to the United States. (Not company policy)
(a) Yes
(b) No - If answered ”No”, skip Question14,15,16 (answer (c) in Question14, (e) in Question15, and (e) in
Question16).

Question14: Does this article indicate policies or regulations that increase or reduce fossil fuel infrastructure
compliance requirements? Please also include news not related to the United States.
(a) Restriction
(b) Expansion
(c) Neutral - The article does not provide specific details or evidence regarding fossil fuel infrastructure
compliance requirements.

Question15: How likely is the change you indicated in Question14?
(a) Extremely Likely
(b) Very Likely
(c) Somewhat Likely
(d) Slightly Likely
(e) Neutral - if answered Neutral in Question14.

Question16: How significant do you anticipate the impact of this news about compliance requirements will
be on the market prices and operational strategies of fossil fuel companies? Please also include news not
related to the United States.




                                                       61
  (a) Most Significant Impact23
  (b) Highly Significant Impact24
  (c) Moderate Impact25
  (d) Minimal Impact26
  (e) No Impact27

We analyzed a total of 33,960 news articles, filtered by the above keywords over our 12-year sample
period. The five topics included in our index construction are:
    • U.S. carbon pricing policy
    • U.S. regulatory or financial cost of carbon emissions
    • Renewable energy or battery storage technology breakthroughs probability
    • Actual technology breakthroughs on renewable energy or battery storage
    • Regulations that affect the production capacity of fossil fuels
Table 5 to 9 present sample responses from GPT-4o Mini along with explanations. The model successfully
identifies irrelevant news articles and assigns them neutral scores, which are mapped as zero in subsequent
aggregations and do not affect the construction of the index. It also effectively analyzes the direction
each article takes on the topics, demonstrating its capability for news analysis tasks.




  24
     This news is amongst the most impactful on the fossil fuel industry in a given year. It’s likely to lead to
extreme fluctuations in market prices and will force companies to alter their long-term operational strategies and
investment plans.
  25
     This news will have a large impact on fossil fuel industry. It’s likely to lead to considerable fluctuations in
market prices and may prompt these companies to re-evaluate and alter their long-term operational strategies.
  26
     There might be some short-term volatility in market prices, but the long-term operational strategies of these
companies are likely to remain largely unchanged.
  27
     This news is unlikely to have a substantial impact on the fossil fuel industry. There might be slight and
temporary fluctuations in market prices, but the overall business operations and strategies of these companies
are expected to remain stable and largely unaffected by this development.
  28
     The article has negligible impact on both the prices and operational strategies of fossil fuel firms.


                                                        62
                                                         Table 5: Responses From GPT - U.S. Carbon Pricing Policy


                                                                                           Responses from GPT-4o Mini
      Headline                     Relevance      Direction        Strength      Importance                                    Explanation
                                                                                                 The article discusses a significant new plan by President Obama to
                                                                                                 regulate carbon emissions from power plants, indicating a tightening of
      Using Executive
                                                                                     Most        U.S. carbon pricing policy. The regulations aim to curb emissions,
      Powers, Obama Begins                                        Extremely
                                       Yes       Tightening                       Significant    which will likely lead to increased costs for fossil fuel producers,
      His Last Big Push on                                         Likely
                                                                                    Impact       particularly coal. The mention of potential job losses in the coal
      Climate Policy
                                                                                                 industry and the need for states to adopt cleaner energy options
                                                                                                 further supports this tightening stance.
                                                                                                 The article discusses U.S. carbon pricing policy indirectly through
                                                                                                 California’s efforts to maintain stricter emissions standards against the
                                                                                                 Trump administration’s rollbacks. The administration’s actions,
63




      Trump Stymies
                                                                                    Highly       including revoking California’s authority under the Clean Air Act,
      California Climate                                          Extremely
                                       Yes        Loosening                       Significant    indicate a loosening of carbon pricing policy. This is significant as it
      Efforts Even as State                                        Likely
                                                                                    Impact       undermines California’s leadership in climate policy, which could lead
      Burns
                                                                                                 to broader implications for carbon pricing nationally. The likelihood of
                                                                                                 this change affecting the fossil fuel industry is high due to California’s
                                                                                                 economic influence.
                                                                                                 The article does not discuss U.S. carbon pricing policy or related
      Parachutist’s Record                                                                       factors, focusing instead on Alan Eustace’s record-breaking jump. It
      Fall: Over 25 Miles in           No          Neutral         Neutral        No Impact      highlights his technical achievements and personal motivations rather
      15 Minutes                                                                                 than any policy implications. Therefore, the responses reflect a neutral
                                                                                                 stance regarding carbon pricing policy.
     Note: Sample responses from GPT-4o Mini on the topic of U.S. Carbon Pricing Policy.
                                              Table 6: Responses From GPT - U.S. Regulatory or Financial Cost of Carbon Emissions


                                                                                            Responses from GPT-4o Mini
      Headline                      Relevance       Direction        Strength       Importance                                      Explanation
                                                                                                    The article indicates an increase in the regulatory cost of carbon
                                                                                                    emissions due to the new limits imposed on coal and gas plants. The
                                                                                                    requirement for technology like carbon capture and sequestration adds
      Administration to                                                               Highly
                                                                    Extremely                       financial burdens to coal operators. This regulatory change is likely to
      Press Ahead With                  Yes          Increase                       Significant
                                                                     Likely                         have a highly significant impact on fossil fuel producers, as they may
      Carbon Limits                                                                   Impact
                                                                                                    need to invest heavily in compliance technologies and potentially alter
                                                                                                    their operational strategies to adapt to the new standards, leading to
                                                                                                    considerable market fluctuations.
                                                                                                    The article indicates a decrease in regulatory costs associated with
                                                                                                    carbon emissions due to the rollback of stringent vehicle pollution
64




                                                                                                    regulations. This change is deemed extremely likely, as the Trump
      Trump to Undo Vehicle                                                           Highly        administration is expected to simplify compliance for automakers,
                                                                    Extremely
      Rules That Curb                   Yes         Decrease                        Significant     reducing their financial burden. The impact on fossil fuel producers is
                                                                     Likely
      Global Warming                                                                  Impact        considered highly significant, as the relaxation of these standards may
                                                                                                    lead to increased emissions and potentially lower operational costs for
                                                                                                    fossil fuel companies, prompting them to adjust their strategies
                                                                                                    accordingly.
                                                                                                    Similarly, the article does not address regulatory or financial costs of
                                                                                                    carbon emissions in the U.S. It centers on ecological research rather
      A Hot Spot for River
                                        No           Neutral         Neutral        No Impact       than economic or regulatory frameworks, resulting in ’No’ for
      Otters? The Latrine
                                                                                                    Question5 and a neutral stance in Questions 6-8, indicating no impact
                                                                                                    on the fossil fuel industry.
     Note: Sample responses from GPT-4o Mini on the topic of U.S. regulatory or financial cost of carbon emissions.
                                   Table 7: Responses From GPT - Renewable Energy or Battery Storage Technology Breakthrough Probability


                                                                                          Responses from GPT-4o Mini
      Headline                      Relevance      Direction        Strength      Importance                                        Explanation
                                                                                                  The article discusses a new solar technology that aims to enhance the
                                                                                                  energy content of natural gas, indicating a breakthrough in renewable
      New Solar Process Gets                                                         Highly
                                                                   Extremely                      energy. The process could reduce natural gas usage and greenhouse gas
      More Out of Natural              Yes          Increase                       Significant
                                                                    Likely                        emissions by 20%, which is significant for renewable energy
      Gas                                                                            Impact
                                                                                                  advancements. The mention of federal stimulus funding also highlights
                                                                                                  governmental support for such innovations.
                                                                                                  The article discusses the collapse of Suntech Power, a major player in
                                                                                                  the solar industry, indicating a significant downturn in the renewable
      Chinese Solar Panel                                                            Highly       energy sector. The bankruptcy reflects a decrease in the viability of
                                                                   Extremely
      Giant Is Tainted by              Yes         Decrease                        Significant    solar manufacturing, particularly for Chinese companies, due to
65




                                                                    Likely
      Bankruptcy                                                                     Impact       overcapacity and tariffs. This suggests a decrease in breakthrough
                                                                                                  probabilities for renewable energy technologies as financial instability
                                                                                                  hampers innovation and growth.
                                                                                                  The article does not discuss renewable energy or battery storage
      Dwarf Planet Lacks                                                                          technology breakthroughs, focusing instead on the scientific findings
      Atmosphere, Glimpse               No          Neutral         Neutral        No Impact      related to the dwarf planet Makemake. Therefore, it is marked as ’No’
      Suggests                                                                                    for Question1, leading to a neutral stance in subsequent questions
                                                                                                  regarding renewable energy impacts.
     Note: Sample responses from GPT-4o Mini on the topic of renewable energy or battery storage technology breakthroughs probability.
                                         Table 8: Responses From GPT - Actual Breakthroughs on Renewable Energy or Battery Storage


                                                                                        Responses from GPT-4o Mini
      Headline                     Discussed Actual BT?               Importance                                              Explanation
                                                                                             The article details the actual implementation of battery storage
                                                                                             technology, which is already operational on Beatty’s farm. This
      Batteries That Make                                                                    technology allows for better energy management and increased
                                                                   Highly Significant
      Use of Solar Power,                     Yes                                            revenue, indicating a highly significant impact on fossil fuel market
                                                                        Impact
      Even in the Dark                                                                       dynamics as renewable energy becomes more competitive. The
                                                                                             potential for battery storage to stabilize energy supply further
                                                                                             emphasizes its importance in the transition to renewable energy.
                                                                                             The article details actual technology breakthroughs, such as the
                                                                                             successful testing of floating platforms at the University of Maine.
      Wind Farms See                                                                         These advancements are expected to reduce costs and improve the
66




                                                                   Highly Significant
      Promise in Platforms                    Yes                                            viability of offshore wind energy, which could significantly impact fossil
                                                                        Impact
      That Float                                                                             fuel market prices as renewable energy becomes more competitive. The
                                                                                             anticipated commercial deployment of these technologies suggests a
                                                                                             highly significant impact on fossil fuel operational strategies.
                                                                                             The article mentions that the eHighway project is already operational,
                                                                                             with trucks using the system, indicating a realized technology
      What if Highways Were
                                                                   Highly Significant        breakthrough. This could lead to a highly significant impact on fossil
      Electric? Germany Is                    Yes
                                                                        Impact               fuel market prices as companies may need to adapt to a changing
      Testing the Idea.
                                                                                             landscape where electric-powered trucks become more prevalent, thus
                                                                                             affecting their long-term operational strategies.
     Note: Sample responses from GPT-4o Mini on the topic of actual technology breakthroughs on renewable energy or battery storage.
                                          Table 9: Responses From GPT - Regulations that Affect the Production Capacity of Fossil Fuels


                                                                                             Responses from GPT-4o Mini
      Headline                       Relevance       Direction        Strength       Importance                                      Explanation
                                                                                                      The article discusses significant restrictions on coal financing, with
                                                                                                      major banks like JPMorgan Chase, Bank of America, and Citigroup
                                                                                      Extremely       halting funding for new coal projects. This shift indicates a permanent
      Banks Pull Back on                                             Extremely
                                        Yes         Restriction                       Significant     downward trend in coal production capacity, as banks view lending to
      Funding Coal                                                    Likely
                                                                                        Impact        coal companies as increasingly risky. The impact on market prices is
                                                                                                      expected to be significant due to the potential for extreme fluctuations
                                                                                                      and the need for companies to alter their operational strategies.
                                                                                                      The article discusses President Trump’s actions to expedite the
      Trump Revives                                                                     Highly        Keystone XL and Dakota Access pipelines, which directly affect fossil
                                                                     Extremely
      Keystone Pipeline                 Yes         Expansion                         Significant     fuel companies’ ability to expand production capacity. By reviving
67




                                                                      Likely
      Rejected by Obama                                                                 Impact        these projects, the administration is facilitating increased oil transport
                                                                                                      and production, indicating a clear policy shift towards expansion.
                                                                                                      The article discusses the Biden administration’s new rule to regulate
                                                                                                      methane emissions from existing oil and gas rigs, which directly affects
      Biden Administration                                                                            fossil fuel companies’ ability to expand production capacity. The
                                                                                        Highly
      Moves to Limit                                                 Extremely                        proposed regulations aim to limit methane emissions, indicating a
                                        Yes         Restriction                       Significant
      Methane, a Potent                                               Likely                          restriction on operations that could lead to increased costs and
                                                                                        Impact
      Greenhouse Gas                                                                                  compliance burdens for these companies. This is significant as it
                                                                                                      represents a shift from previous policies and aims to address climate
                                                                                                      change more aggressively.
     Note: Sample responses from GPT-4o Mini on the topic of regulations that affect the production capacity of fossil fuels.
D.1.3     Aggregation
To measure the overall views of climate transition news in a given week, we construct news indices
by aggregating article-level scores to a weekly level. Compared with daily scores, weekly scores are
more likely to capture discussions around the event date. They also better capture the stock market’s
response in the days following the event when we connect these indices to stock returns later. We
include news from Saturday and Sunday in the following week since this news would only be reflected on
Monday when the market opens. Before aggregation, we map textual responses into numerical scores.
For direction responses, tightening carbon policies, more drilling restrictions, and increased renewable
technology breakthrough probability are mapped to “+1”. Loosening carbon policies, fewer drilling
restrictions, and decreased renewable technology breakthrough probability are mapped to “−1”. For the
question measuring the strength of direction, responses range from neutral to extremely likely. We code
“Extremely Likely” and “Very Likely” as 1; and “Somewhat Likely,” “Slightly Likely,” and “Neutral” as
0. This coding scheme accounts for the GPT’s noisy yet broadly accurate characterizations, allowing for
the detection of overarching patterns while acknowledging the unreliability of fine-grained distinctions in
magnitude. For the question measuring the potential impact of the news on market prices and operational
strategies of fossil fuel companies, responses range from no impact to highly significant impact. Similarly
to the question measuring strength, we code “Most Significant Impact” and “Highly Significant Impact”
as 1; and “Moderate Impact,” “Minimal Impact,” and “No Impact” as 0.
    We build the indices by multiplying direction scores with strength and importance scores, which
measure the magnitude and direction of the news’ effect on stock prices of fossil fuel firms.

                                                   N
                                                   X
                                        Idxk,t =         Dk,j,t Sk,j,t Ik,j,t ,
                                                   j=1


where Dk,j,t is the direction score for index k of article j at week t, Sk,j,t is the strength score for index
k of article j at week t, and Ik,j,t is the importance score for index k of article j at week t. N is the total
number of article within each week. We build an index for each of the topics mentioned in section D.1.2.
     Among the five indices we measured, the index measuring U.S. carbon pricing policy and the index
measuring U.S. regulatory or financial cost of carbon emissions both assess the cost of emissions, but with
different focuses. The U.S. carbon pricing policy index focuses more on policy announcements, while
the other index covers events like changes in fuel efficiency standards. To better comprehend the index
measuring the cost of emissions and eliminate potential noise from model running, we combine these
two indices into a single NYT-Emission Cost News Index. Similarly, the renewable energy technology
breakthrough probability index and the actual technology breakthroughs in renewable energy index are
combined into the NYT-Renewable Breakthrough News Index. We combine these indices by taking the
arithmetic mean of each index divided by their standard deviation. Figure 1 plots the time series of
these two news indices, together with the oil capacity news index, with labels indicating related events.


D.2     Classification of energy companies and returns data cleaning
For fossil fuel firms, we focus on integrated oil companies engaged in the exploration and production
of oil and gas (GICS codes 10102010 and 10102020), excluding manufacturers of drilling equipment
(GICS code 10101020), drilling contractors (GICS code 10101010), oil marketing (GICS code 10102030),
and storage and transportation companies (GICS code 10102040) that are not directly involved in oil
production. We also dropped observations with stock price < $1 if it was preceded by a month of stock
prices < $1.
    To obtain our continuous classification of existing production capacity, we compute a proved de-
veloped reserves ratio by dividing the combined amount of proved developed reserves for oil, natural
gas, and natural gas liquids in barrel of oil equivalents (BOE) by the combined amount of total proved




                                                         68
reserves for these resources in BOE.29 This ratio indicates the extent to which a firm has capitalized on
its reserves: firms with a higher ratio have developed more of theirs, suggesting they have established
operations and are more similar to incumbents in our model. Conversely, firms with a lower ratio have
not yet build the infrastructure to develop a large fraction of the reserves that they own, and are more
similar to entrants in our model.
     We obtain the proved developed reserves and total proved reserves from the Industry Specific Annual
section of Compustat where available. Otherwise, we manually looked up reserves values in the SEC’s
EDGAR database to input 116 instances of companies missing yearly reserves data in the Compustat
database. We also carried forward this value for a maximum of 2 years, to account for when companies
change their year-end definition and delay filing their 10-K reports. Figure 8 shows the histogram of
developed reserves ratio.

                                            Figure 8: Distribution of Developed Reserves Ratio

                       (a) Developed Reserves Ratio                                            (b) % Change in Developed Reserves Ratio
           15




                                                                                          30
           10




                                                                                          20
 Percent




                                                                                Percent
           5




                                                                                          10
           0




                                                                                          0




                0       .2          .4             .6          .8      1                       -1   -.8   -.6      -.4    -.2     0     .2    .4     .6   .8   1
                             Developed/Total Proved Reserves                                                    % Change in Developed Reserves Ratio


Note: The left panel shows the distribution of ratios of developed/total reserves (reported annually). The right
panel instead reports the distribution of annual percentage change in the developed reserves ratio by firms. Rare
extreme changes (i.e., above 100% and below -100%) are excluded.


For renewable firms, we use the holding firms of the Invesco Solar ETF and the First Trust Global Wind
Energy ETF, which includes companies in the solar and wind energy industry respectively. We use these
ETFs to categorize 19 companies listed on U.S. stock exchanges as renewable companies.
     To implement the test, we measure innovations in each of the emission cost, renewable technology
breakthrough probability, and oil capacity news by constructing values of each as residuals from the
following weekly AR(1) model:

                                                         Idxk,t = αk + φk Idxk,t−1 + νk,t ,

where Idxk,t is index k at week t and νk,t represents the AR(1) innovations of index k at week t. We
scale the residuals by their standard deviation.


D.3                 Oil Futures Price
Table 10 reports the data description and sources of the variables utilized in our study of oil futures
prices.
   29
   Barrel of oil equivalents (BOE) allows to aggregate oil, natural gas and natural gas liquids reserves by the
amount of energy they produce.




                                                                           69
                                      Table 10: Data Description and Sources

 Variable           Description                                         Source       Frequency   Processing
 CL.hh              WTI crude oil futures hh-month contract (set-       Bloomberg    Daily       End of week/month
                    tlement price)                                                               % change
 CPIAUCSL           U.S. CPI for all urban consumers: all items         FRED         Monthly     % change
 GDPC1              U.S. Real Gross Domestic Product                    FRED         Quarterly   % change
 M1SL               M1 money supply                                     FRED         Monthly     % change
 M2SL               M2 money supply                                     FRED         Monthly     % change
 CFNAI              Chicago Fed National Activity Index                 Chicago      Monthly     constructed to be
                                                                        FED                      stationary
 IGREA              Kilian’s (2009) index of global real economic ac-   Dallas FED   Monthly     constructed to be
                    tivity                                                                       stationary
 LW.hh              hh-month zero-coupon treasury yields by Liu         Wu’s web-    Daily       End of week/month
                    and Wu (2021)                                       page                     % change
 OECD ConsChg       OECD liquid fuel consumption change                 EIA          Quarterly

Note: Table provides descriptions, sources, and the frequency of the variables utilized in our study of oil futures
prices (section 3.3). The last column details the processing methods applied to convert raw data into the variables
used in our analysis.


D.4      Robustness
In this section, we include several robustness tests on filtering articles, aggregating article-level GPT
responses to the weekly level, and regression specifications. We constructed the news indices by summing
the products of direction, signal strength, and responses from the importance question. Table 11 presents
versions for other scaling methods: direction only, direction scaled by signal strength, and direction scaled
only by importance. The results are consistent across scaling methods.
    We obtained our results in Table 3 by adding section filtering for 9 of the 10 most frequent sections
in the New York Times, using a 3-year rolling window for each firm to remove market influences, and
using the total developed ratio of fossil fuel firms. Table 12 presents versions of our regression without
section filtering, using a 5-year rolling window to remove market beta, and using the oil developed ratio,
defined as the ratio between the amount of developed reserves for oil and the amount of total proved
reserves for oil, obtained from Compustat and the SEC’s EDGAR database. We find that our results are
directionally consistent across all regression specifications, with varying levels of statistical significance.
    We compare our results with regression results using other measures of transition risk introduced in
Ardia et al. (2023), Faccini et al. (2023), and Bua et al. (2024) and the same stock price and oil futures
price regression specifications as in Tables 3 and 4. For the stock price regression, the results are largely
statistically insignificant. The results which are statistically significant agree with our empirical results,
except Bua’s Transition News measure interacted with a renewable dummy. For the oil price regression,
only Ardia’s Media Climate Change Concern (MCCC) Index was statistically significant, with a large
positive coefficient, showing that as climate change concern increases, oil futures prices also increase.




                                                           70
                       Table 11: Stock Returns and NYT Index - Robustness (Scaling Methods)

                                                          Cost of Emission                        Renewable BT                            Oil Capacity
                                                    (1)         (2)           (3)       (4)            (5)          (6)          (7)          (8)           (9)
Fossil Fuel Company × Index AR(1) Innovation     -0.0062∗∗   -0.0053∗∗   -0.0059∗∗   -0.0081∗∗∗    -0.0079∗∗∗    -0.0080∗∗∗   -0.0047∗∗    -0.0044∗∗     -0.0047∗∗
                                                  (0.0024)    (0.0025)    (0.0025)    (0.0019)      (0.0021)      (0.0019)     (0.0022)     (0.0022)      (0.0022)
Fossil Fuel Company × Index AR(1) Innovation ×   0.0100∗∗∗    0.0092∗∗   0.0098∗∗∗   0.0121∗∗∗      0.0118∗∗∗    0.0119∗∗∗    0.0076∗∗      0.0073∗∗     0.0076∗∗
Developed Ratio                                  (0.0035)     (0.0037)   (0.0036)    (0.0029)       (0.0032)     (0.0029)     (0.0034)      (0.0034)     (0.0034)
Renewable × Index AR(1) Innovation               0.0023∗∗     0.0026∗∗   0.0023∗∗    0.0027∗∗∗      0.0027∗∗∗    0.0026∗∗∗     0.0012        0.0012       0.0012
                                                 (0.0010)     (0.0011)   (0.0010)    (0.0007)       (0.0007)     (0.0007)     (0.0009)      (0.0009)     (0.0009)
Company FE                                         Yes          Yes          Yes        Yes           Yes           Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes
Remove Market from Stock Returns                   Yes          Yes          Yes        Yes           Yes           Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes
Specification                                      Dir        Dir×Str    Dir×Imp        Dir         Dir×Str      Dir×Imp        Dir         Dir×Str      Dir×Imp
R2                                                0.607        0.606         0.606     0.629         0.626         0.626       0.586         0.585        0.586
Observations                                      50851        50851         50851     50851         50851         50851       50851         50851        50851

Note: This is a robustness table of Table 3. Regressions (1)-(3) show coefficients of regressing stock returns
on AR(1) innovations of NYT-Emission Cost News Index interacted with dummies indicating fossil fuel and
renewable firms, as well as the interaction between the fossil fuel dummy and the developed ratio, controlling for
firm fixed effects. Regressions (4)-(6) instead show coefficients of regressing stock returns on AR(1) innovations of
NYT-Renewable Breakthrough News Index, and regressions (7)-(9) show coefficients of regressing stock returns on
AR(1) innovations of NYT-Oil Capacity Index. We removed market influences from stock returns by computing
the market beta via a 3-year rolling window for each firm, then subtracting the beta times the market returns
from firms’ stock returns. We removed observations with stock price < $1 if it was preceded by a month of stock
prices < $1. We focus on the most frequent sections: “business financial”, “national”, “foreign”, “metropolitan”,
“science”, “climate”, “us”, “editorial”, “business”, excluding sections such as “travel” and “opinion” to better
capture direct news such as new policy announcements. We focus on energy firms in these regressions. The news
indices were constructed by scaling direction based on the signal strength and the news’s importance to market
prices and oil industry operation strategies. This table includes several scaling methods: direction only ((1), (4)
and (7)); direction scaling by signal strength ((2), (5) and (8)); and direction scaling by importance ((3), (6) and
(9)). Significance levels: * (p<0.10), ** (p<0.05), *** (p<0.01).




                                                                         71
                    Table 12: Stock Returns and NYT Index - Robustness (Regression Specifications)

                                                           Cost of Emission                         Renewable BT                           Oil Capacity
                                                    (1)          (2)           (3)        (4)            (5)          (6)         (7)          (8)          (9)
Fossil Fuel Company × Index AR(1) Innovation     -0.0072∗∗∗     -0.0030   -0.0055∗∗∗   -0.0069∗∗∗    -0.0058∗∗∗    -0.0066∗∗∗    -0.0038    -0.0031∗   -0.0038∗∗
                                                  (0.0023)     (0.0023)    (0.0018)     (0.0022)      (0.0020)      (0.0019)    (0.0025)    (0.0018)    (0.0018)
Fossil Fuel Company × Index AR(1) Innovation ×   0.0112∗∗∗     0.0058∗    0.0094∗∗∗    0.0097∗∗∗      0.0086∗∗∗    0.0097∗∗∗    0.0079∗∗    0.0051∗       0.0061∗∗
Developed Ratio                                  (0.0034)      (0.0034)   (0.0027)     (0.0035)       (0.0032)     (0.0029)     (0.0037)    (0.0028)      (0.0027)
Renewable × Index AR(1) Innovation               0.0028∗∗∗     0.0029∗∗   0.0026∗∗     0.0023∗∗∗      0.0022∗∗∗    0.0027∗∗∗    0.0017∗      0.0013        0.0012
                                                 (0.0011)      (0.0011)   (0.0011)     (0.0008)       (0.0007)     (0.0007)     (0.0009)    (0.0010)      (0.0009)
Company FE                                          Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes
Section Filtering                                   No           Yes          Yes         No            Yes           Yes         No           Yes          Yes
Remove Market from Stock Returns                    3y           5y            3y         3y             5y           3y          3y           5y           3y
Developed Ratio Type                               Total        Total          Oil       Total         Total          Oil        Total        Total         Oil
R2                                                 0.621        0.617         0.617      0.610         0.622         0.622       0.602       0.597         0.585
Observations                                       50851        45808         50557      50851         45808         50557       50851       45808         50557

Note: This is a robustness table of Table 3. Regressions (1) and (2) show coefficients of regressing stock returns
on AR(1) innovations of NYT-Emission Cost News Index interacted with dummies indicating fossil fuel and
renewable firms, as well as the interaction between the fossil fuel dummy and the total developed reserves ratio,
controlling for firm fixed effects. Regression (3) shows coefficients of the same regression specifications, instead
using the oil developed reserves ratio. Regressions (4)-(6), and Regressions (7)-(9) follow a similar pattern,
instead showing coefficients of regressing stock returns on AR(1) innovations of NYT-Renewable Breakthrough
News Index and on AR(1) innovations of NYT-Oil Capacity Index respectively. Except for in Regressions (2),
(5) and (8), we removed market influences from stock returns by computing the market beta via a 3-year rolling
window for each firm, then subtracting the beta times the market returns from firms’ stock returns. Except
for in Regressions (1), (4) and (7), we focus on the most frequent sections: “business financial”, “national”,
“foreign”, “metropolitan”, “science”, “climate”, “us”, “editorial”, “business”, excluding sections such as “travel”
and “opinion” to better capture direct news such as new policy announcements. We focus on energy firms in these
regressions and removed observations with stock price < $1 if it was preceded by a month of stock prices < $1.
In Regressions (1), (4) and (7) no section filter is applied before running the empirical analysis. In Regressions
(2), (5) and (8) we computed the market beta via a 5-year rolling window for each firm, and then subtracted
the beta times the market returns from firms’ stock returns. In Regressions (3), (6) and (9), we used the oil
developed ratio as the regressor, defined as the ratio between the amount of developed reserves for oil and the
amount of total proved reserves for oil. Standard errors are in parentheses and are clustered at the company
level. Significance levels: * (p<0.10), ** (p<0.05), *** (p<0.01).




                                                                          72
                                   Table 13: Stock Returns and Other Indices

                                                                     XXXXXXXX        XXXXXXXX        XXXXXXXX
                                                                        Bua            Faccini         Ardia
                                                                           (1)            (2)             (3)
 Fossil Fuel Company × Index AR(1) Innovation                           -0.0041∗∗        -0.0003         0.0023
                                                                        (0.0018)        (0.0028)        (0.0030)
 Fossil Fuel Company × Index AR(1) Innovation × Developed Ratio          0.0035          0.0008          -0.0034
                                                                        (0.0028)        (0.0041)        (0.0047)
 Renewable × Index AR(1) Innovation                                    -0.0025∗∗∗      0.0039∗∗∗         0.0008
                                                                        (0.0007)       (0.0010)         (0.0007)
 Company FE                                                               Yes             Yes             Yes
 Remove Market from Stock Returns                                         Yes             Yes             Yes
 R2                                                                      0.610           0.614           2.862
 Observations                                                            50851           49082           29687

Note: This is a robustness table of Table 3. Regression (1) shows coefficients of regressing stock returns on
AR(1) innovations of Bua et al. (2024) Transition Risk Index interacted with dummies indicating fossil fuel and
renewable firms, as well as the interaction between the fossil fuel dummy and the total developed reserves ratio,
controlling for firm fixed effects. Regressions (2) and (3) instead show coefficients of regressing stock returns on
the AR(1) innovations of the Faccini et al. (2023) Climate Policy Index and AR(1) innovations of the Ardia et
al. (2023) Media Climate Change Concern Index respectively. We removed market influences from stock returns
by computing the market beta via a 3-year rolling window for each firm, then subtracting the beta times the
market returns from firms’ stock returns. We removed observations with stock price < $1 if it was preceded
by a month of stock prices < $1. We focus on the most frequent sections: “business financial”, “national”,
“foreign”, “metropolitan”, “science”, “climate”, “us”, “editorial”, “business”, excluding sections such as “travel”
and “opinion” to better capture direct news such as new policy announcements. We focus on energy firms in
these regressions. Standard errors are in parentheses and are clustered at the company level. Significance levels:
* (p<0.10), ** (p<0.05), *** (p<0.01).




                                                        73
                                 Table 14: Oil Futures Price and Other Indices

 XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX                                       XXXXXXXX        XXXXXXXX XXXXXXXX
                                                                                  Monthly Level
                                                                    Avg 1-12m      Avg 13-60m      Avg 1-60m
                                                                       (1)             (2)            (3)
 Index AR(1) Innovation - Bua Transition Risk Index                   -0.0017         0.0009          -0.0004
                                                                     (0.0055)        (0.0038)        (0.0043)
 Controls                                                              Yes             Yes             Yes
 R2                                                                    0.45            0.42            0.48
 Observations                                                          143             143             143
                                                                        (1)            (2)             (3)
 Index AR(1) Innovation - Faccini Climate Policy                      0.0063          0.0030          0.0042
                                                                     (0.0071)        (0.0049)        (0.0051)
 Controls                                                              Yes             Yes             Yes
 R2                                                                    0.47            0.44            0.49
 Observations                                                          137             137             137
                                                                        (1)            (2)             (3)
 Index AR(1) Innovation - Ardia Media Climate Change Concern         0.0197∗∗∗      0.0144∗∗∗       0.0179∗∗∗
                                                                     (0.0057)       (0.0040)        (0.0050)
 Controls                                                              Yes             Yes             Yes
 R2                                                                    0.47            0.46            0.49
 Observations                                                           77              77              77

Note: Columns (1) to (3) report on three equally weighted averages of WTI oil futures returns: Column (1) covers
returns for futures with maturities ranging from 1 to 12 months; Column (2) includes futures with maturities from
13 to 24 months, as well as the 60-month futures returns; and Column (3) uses futures with maturities ranging
from 1 to 24 months, and the 60-month futures returns. The regressions control for several macroeconomic
factors: the U.S. inflation rate, U.S. real GDP growth, percentage changes in M1 and M2 money supplies,
CFNAI, Kilian’s (2009) global real activity index, stock market excess returns, and changes in OECD liquid fuel
consumption. Additionally, the regressions control for the percentage change in treasury yields matched to the
maturity of the oil futures. For instance, for the average oil futures returns across 1 to 12 months, we use 1,
3, 6, and 12-month treasury yields. Similarly, for the average returns of oil futures across 13 to 60 months, 24
and 60-month treasury yields are used. Finally, for average returns of oil futures across 1 to 60 months, we use
1, 3, 6, 12, 24 and 60-month treasury yields. The p-values for testing the difference between the coefficients
of each pair of NYT news indices are also reported. Standard errors are in parentheses and are corrected for
heteroscedasticity. Significance levels: * (p<0.10), ** (p<0.05), *** (p<0.01).




                                                       74
